Elric of Melnibone by Michael Moorcock
Book One of the Elric Saga



Contents

BOOK ONE

1 A Melancholy King: A Court Strives to Honour Him
2 An Upstart Prince: He Confronts His Cousin
3 Riding Through the Morning: A Moment of Tranquility
4 Prisoners: Their Secrets Are Taken from Them
5 A Battle: The King Proves His War-Skill
6 Pursuit: A Deliberate Treachery


BOOK TWO

1 The Caverns of the Sea King
2 A New Emperor and an Emperor Renewed
3 A Tradition Justice
4 To Call the Chaos Lord
5 The Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea
6 What the Earth God Desired
7 King Grome
8 The City and the Mirror


BOOK THREE

1 Through the Shade Gate
2 In the City of Ameeron
3 The Tunnel Under the Marsh
4 Two Black Swords
5 The Pale King's Mercy
Epilogue


BOOK ONE

 On the island kingdom of Melnibone all the old rituals are still observed, though the nation's power
has waned for five hundred years, and now her way of life is maintained only by her trade with the
Young Kingdoms and the fact that the city of Imrryr has become the meeting place of merchants. Are
those rituals no longer useful; can the rituals be denied and doom avoided? One who would rule in
Emperor Elric's stead prefers to think not. He says that Elric will bring destruction to Melnibone by his
refusal to honour all the rituals (Elric honours many). And now opens the tragedy which will close many
years from now and precipitate the destruction of this world.


1

A Melancholy King:
A Court Strives to Honour Him

 IT IS THE colour of a bleached skull, his flesh; and the long hair which flows below his shoulders
is milk-white. From the tapering, beautiful head stare two slanting eyes, crimson and moody, and from
the loose sleeves of his yellow gown emerge two slender hands, also the colour of bone, resting on each
arm of a seat which has been carved from a single, massive ruby.
 The crimson eyes are troubled and sometimes one hand will rise to finger the light helm which sits
upon the white locks: a helm made from some dark, greenish alloy and exquisitely moulded into the
likeness of a dragon about to take wing. And on the hand which absently caresses the crown there is a
ring in which is set a single rare Actorios stone whose core sometimes shifts sluggishly and reshapes
itself, as if it were sentient smoke and as restless in its jewelled prison as the young albino on his Ruby
Throne.
 He looks down the long flight of quartz steps to where his court disports itself, dancing with such
delicacy and whispering grace that it might be a court of ghosts. Mentally he debates moral issues and in
itself this activity divides him from the great majority of his subjects, for these people are not human.
 These are the people of Melnibone, the Dragon Isle, which ruled the world for ten thousand years
and has ceased to rule it for less than five hundred years. And they are cruel and clever and to them
'morality' means little more than a proper respect for the traditions of a hundred centuries.
 To the young man, four hundred and twenty-eighth in direct line of descent from the first Sorcerer
Emperor of Melnibone, their assumptions seem not only arrogant but foolish; it is plain that the Dragon
Isle has lost most of her power and will soon be threatened, in another century or two, by a direct conflict
with the emerging human nations whom they call, somewhat patronisingly, the Young Kingdoms.
Already pirate fleets have made unsuccessful attacks on Imrryr the Beautiful, the Dreaming City, capital
of the Dragon Isle of Melnibone.
 Yet even the emperor's closest friends refuse to discuss the prospect of Melnibone's fall. They are
not pleased when he mentions the idea, considering his remarks not only unthinkable, but also a singular
breach of good taste.
 So, alone, the emperor broods. He mourns that his father, Sadric the Eighty-Sixth, did not sire more
children, for then a more suitable monarch might have been available to take his place on the Ruby
Throne. Sadric has been dead a year; whispering a glad welcome to that which came to claim his soul.
Through most of his life Sadric had never known another woman than his wife, for the Empress had died
bringing her sole thin-blooded issue into the world. But, with Melnibonean emotions (oddly different
from those of the human newcomers), Sadric had loved his wife and had been unable to find pleasure in
any other company, even that of the son who had killed her and who was all that was left of her. By
magic potions and the chanting of runes, by rare herbs had her son been nurtured, his strength sustained
artificially by every art known to the Sorcerer Kings of Melnibone. And he had lived--still lives--thanks
to sorcery alone, for he is naturally lassitudinous and, without his drugs, would barely be able to raise his
hand from his side through most of a normal day.
 If the young emperor has found any advantage in his lifelong weakness it must be in that, perforce,
he has read much. Before he was fifteen he had read every book in his father's library, some more than
once. His sorcerous powers, learned initially from Sadric, are now greater than any possessed by his
ancestors for many a generation. His knowledge of the world beyond the shores of Melnibone is
profound, though he has as yet had little direct experience of it. If he wishes he could resurrect the
Dragon Isle's former might and rule both his own land and the Young Kingdoms as an invulnerable
tyrant. But his reading has also taught him to question the uses to which power is put, to question his
motives, to question whether his own power should be used at all, in any cause. His reading has led him
to this 'morality', which, still, he barely understands. Thus, to his subjects, he is an enigma and, to some, 
he is a threat, for he neither thinks nor acts in accordance with their conception of how a true
Melnibonean (and a Melnibonean emperor, at that) should think and act. His cousin Yyrkoon, for
instance, has been heard more than once to voice strong doubts concerning the emperor's right to rule the
people of Melnibone. 'This feeble scholar will bring doom to us all,' he said one night to Dyvim Tvar,
Lord of the Dragon Caves.
 Dyvim Tvar is one of the emperor's few friends and he had duly reported the conversation, but the
youth had dismissed the remarks as 'only a trivial treason', whereas any of his ancestors would have
rewarded such sentiments with a very slow and exquisite public execution.
 The emperor's attitude is further complicated by the fact that Yyrkoon, who is even now making
precious little secret of his feelings that he should be emperor, is the brother of Cymoril, a girl whom the
albino considers the closest of his friends, and who will one day become his empress.

 Down on the mosaic floor of the court Prince Yyrkoon can be seen in all his finest silks and furs,
his jewels and his brocades, dancing with a hundred women, all of whom are rumoured to have been
mistresses of his at one time or another. His dark features, at once handsome and saturnine, are framed
by long black hair, waved and oiled, and his expression, as ever, is sardonic while his bearing is
arrogant. The heavy brocade cloak swings this way and that, striking other dancers with some force. He
wears it almost as if it is armour or, perhaps, a weapon. Amongst many of the courtiers there is more
than a little respect for Prince Yyrkoon. Few resent his arrogance and those who do keep silent, for
Yyrkoon is known to be a considerable sorcerer himself. Also his behaviour is what the court expects
and welcomes in a Melnibonean noble; it is what they would welcome in their emperor.
 The emperor knows this. He wishes he could please his court as it strives to honour him with its
dancing and its wit, but he cannot bring himself to take part in what he privately considers a wearisome
and irritating sequence of ritual posturings. In this he is, perhaps, somewhat more arrogant than Yyrkoon
who is, at least, a conventional boor.
 From the galleries, the music grows louder and more complex as the slaves; specially trained and
surgically operated upon to sing but one perfect note each, are stimulated to more passionate efforts.
Even the young emperor is moved by the sinister harmony of their song which in few ways resembles
anything previously uttered by the human voice. Why should their pain produce such marvellous beauty?
he wonders. Or is all beauty created through pain? Is that the secret of great art, both human and
Melnibonean?
 The Emperor Elric closes his eyes.
 There is a stir in the hall below. The gates have opened and the dancing courtiers cease their
motion, drawing back and bowing low as soldiers enter. The soldiers are clad all in light blue, their
ornamental helms cast in fantastic shapes, their long, broad-bladed lances decorated with jewelled
ribbons. They surround a young woman whose blue dress matches their uniforms and whose bare arms
are encircled by five or six bracelets of diamonds, sapphires and gold. Strings of diamonds and sapphires
are wound into her hair. Unlike most of the women of the court, her face has no designs painted upon the
eyelids or cheekbones. Elric smiles. This is Cymoril. The soldiers are her personal ceremonial guard
who, according to tradition, must escort her into the court. They ascend the steps leading to the Ruby
Throne. Slowly Elric rises and stretches out his hands.
 'Cymoril. I thought you had decided not to grace the court tonight?'
 She returns his smile. 'My emperor, I found that I was in the mood for conversation, after all.'
 Elric is grateful. She knows that he is bored and she knows, too, that she is one of the few people of
Melnibone whose conversation interests him. If protocol allowed, he would offer her the throne, but as it
is she must sit on the topmost step at his feet.
 'Please sit, sweet Cymoril.' He resumes his place upon the throne and leans forward as she seats
herself and looks into his eyes with a mixed expression of humour and tenderness. She speaks softly as
her guard withdraws to mingle at the sides of the steps with Elric's own guard. Her voice can be heard 
only by Elric.
 'Would you ride out to the wild region of the island with me tomorrow, my lord?'
 'There are matters to which I must give my attention...' He is attracted by the idea. It is weeks since
he left the city and rode with her, their escort keeping a discreet distance away.
 'Are they urgent?'
 He shrugs. 'What matters are urgent in Melnibone? After ten thousand years, most problems may be
seen in a certain perspective.' His smile is almost a grin, rather like that of a young scholar who plans to
play truant from his tutor. 'Very well--early in the morning, we'll leave, before the others are up.'
 'The air beyond Imrryr will be clear and sharp. The sun will be warm for the season. The sky will be
blue and unclouded.'
 Elric laughs. 'Such sorcery you must have worked!'
 Cymoril lowers her eyes and traces a pattern on the marble of the dais. 'Well, perhaps a little. I am
not without friends among the weakest of the elementals...'
 Elric stretches down to touch her fine, fair hair. 'Does Yyrkoon know?'
 'No.'
 Prince Yyrkoon has forbidden his sister to meddle in magical matters. Prince Yyrkoon's friends are
only among the darker of the supernatural beings and he knows that they are dangerous to deal with; thus
he assumes that all sorcerous dealings bear a similar element of danger. Besides this, he hates to think
that others possess the power that he possesses. Perhaps this is what, in Elric, he hates most of all.
 'Let us hope that all Melnibone needs fine weather for tomorrow,' says Elric. Cymoril stares
curiously at him. She is still a Melnibonean. It has not occurred to her that her sorcery might prove
unwelcome to some. Then she shrugs her lovely shoulders and touches her lord lightly upon the hand.
 'This "guilt",' she says. 'This searching of the conscience. Its purpose is beyond my simple brain.'
 'And mine, I must admit. It seems to have no practical function. Yet more than one of our ancestors
predicted a change in the nature of our earth. A spiritual as well as a physical change. Perhaps I have
glimmerings of this change when I think my stranger, un-Melnibonean, thoughts?'
 The music swells. The music fades. The courtiers dance on, though many eyes are upon Elric and
Cymoril as they talk at the top of the dais. There is speculation. When will Elric announce Cymoril as his
empress-to-be? Will Elric revive the custom that Sadric dismissed, of sacrificing twelve brides and their
bridegrooms to the Lords of Chaos in order to ensure a good marriage for the rulers of Melnibone? It
was obvious that Sadric's refusal to allow the custom to continue brought misery upon him and death
upon his wife; brought him a sickly son and threatened the very continuity of the monarchy. Elric must
revive the custom. Even Elric must fear a repetition of the doom which visited his father. But some say
that Elric will do nothing in accordance with tradition and that he threatens not only his own life, but the
existence of Melnibone itself and all it stands for. And those who speak thus are often seen to be on good
terms with Prince Yyrkoon who dances on, seemingly unaware of their conversation or, indeed, unaware
that his sister talks quietly with the cousin who sits on the Ruby Throne; who sits on the edge of the seat,
forgetful of his dignity, who exhibits none of the ferocious and disdainful pride which has, in the past,
marked virtually every-other emperor of Melnibone; who chats animatedly, forgetful that the court is
supposed to be dancing for his entertainment.
 And then suddenly Prince Yyrkoon freezes in midpirouette and raises his dark eyes to look up at his
emperor. In one corner of the hall, Dyvim Tvar's attention is attracted by Yyrkoon's calculated and
dramatic posture and the Lord of the Dragon Caves frowns. His hand falls to where his sword would
normally be, but no swords are worn at a court ball. Dyvim Tvar looks warily and intently at Prince
Yyrkoon as the tall nobleman begins to ascend the stairs to the Ruby Throne. Many eyes follow the
emperor's cousin and now hardly anyone dances, though the music grows wilder as the masters of the
music slaves goad their charges to even greater exertions.
 Elric looks up to see Yyrkoon standing one step below that on which Cymoril sits. Yyrkoon makes
a bow which is subtly insulting.
 'I present myself to my emperor,' he says.


2

An Upstart Prince:
He Confronts His Cousin

 'AND HOW DO you enjoy the ball, cousin?' Elric asked, aware that Yyrkoon's melodramatic
presentation had been designed to catch him off-guard and, if possible, humiliate him. 'Is the music to
your taste?'
 Yyrkoon lowered his eyes and let his lips form a secret little smile. 'Everything is to my taste, my
liege. But what of yourself?. Does something displease you? You do not join the dance.'
 Elric raised one pale finger to his chin and stared at Yyrkoon's hidden eyes. 'I enjoy the dance,
cousin, nonetheless. Surely it is possible to take pleasure in the pleasure of others?'
 Yyrkoon seemed genuinely astonished. His eyes opened fully and met Elric's. Elric felt a slight
shock and then turned his own gaze away, indicating the music galleries with a languid hand. 'Or perhaps
it is the pain of others which brings me pleasure. Fear not, for my sake, cousin. I am pleased. I am
pleased. You may dance on, assured that your emperor enjoys the ball.'
 But Yyrkoon was not to be diverted from his object. 'Surely, if his subjects are not to go away
saddened and troubled that they have not pleased their ruler, the emperor should demonstrate his
enjoyment...?'
 'I would remind you, cousin,' said Elric quietly, 'that the emperor has no duty to his subjects at all,
save to rule them. Their duty is to him. That is the tradition of Melnibone.'
 Yyrkoon had not expected Elric to use such arguments against him, but he rallied with his next
retort. 'I agree, my lord. The emperor's duty is to rule his subjects. Perhaps that is why so many of them
do not, themselves, enjoy the ball as much as they might.'
 'I do not follow you, cousin.'
 Cymoril had risen and stood with her hands clenched on the step above her brother. She was tense
and anxious, worried by her brother's bantering tone, his disdainful bearing.
 'Yyrkoon...' she said.
 He acknowledged her presence. 'Sister. I see you share our emperor's reluctance to dance.'
 'Yyrkoon,' she murmured, 'you are going too far. The emperor is tolerant, but...'
 'Tolerant? Or is he careless? Is he careless of the traditions of our great race? Is he contemptuous of
that race's pride?'
 Dyvim Tvar was now mounting the steps. It was plain that he, too, sensed that Yyrkoon had chosen
this moment to test Elric's power.
 Cymoril was aghast. She said urgently: 'Yyrkoon. If you would live...'
 'I would not care to live if the soul of Melnibone perished. And the guardianship of our nation's soul
is the responsibility of the emperor. And what if we should have an emperor who failed in that
responsibility? An emperor who was weak? An emperor who cared nothing for the greatness of the
Dragon Isle and its folk?'
 'A hypothetical question, cousin.' Elric had recovered his composure and his voice was an icy
drawl. 'For such an emperor has never sat upon the Ruby Throne and such an emperor never shall.'
 Dyvim Tvar came up, touching Yyrkoon on the shoulder. 'Prince, if you value your dignity and
your life...'
 Elric raised his hand. 'There is no need for that, Dyvim Tvar. Prince Yyrkoon merely entertains us
with an intellectual debate. Fearing that I was bored by the music and the dance--which I am not--he
thought he would provide the subject for a stimulating discourse. I am certain that we are most 
stimulated, Prince Yyrkoon.' Elric allowed a patronising warmth to colour his last sentence.
 Yyrkoon flushed with anger and bit his lip.
 'But go on, dear cousin Yyrkoon,' Elric said. 'I am interested. Enlarge further on your argument.'
 Yyrkoon looked around him, as if for support. But all his supporters were on the floor of the hall.
Only Elric's friends, Dyvim Tvar and Cymoril, were nearby. Yet Yyrkoon knew that his supporters were
hearing every word and that he would lose face if he did not retaliate. Elric could tell that Yyrkoon
would have preferred to have retired from this confrontation and choose another day and another ground
on which to continue the battle, but that was not possible. Elric, himself, had no wish to continue the
foolish banter which was, no matter how disguised, a little better than the quarrelling of two little girls
over who should play with the slaves first. He decided to make an end to it.
 Yyrkoon began: 'Then let me suggest that an emperor who was physically weak might also be weak
in his will to rule as befitted...'
 And Elric raised his hand. 'You have done enough, dear cousin. More than enough. You have
wearied yourself with this conversation when you would have preferred to dance. I am touched by your
concern. But now I, too, feel weariness steal upon me.' Elric signaled for his old servant Tanglebones
who stood on the far side of the throne dais, amongst the soldiers: 'Tanglebones! My cloak.'
 Elric stood up. 'I thank you again for your thoughtfulness, cousin.' He addressed the court in
general. 'I was entertained. Now I retire.'
 Tanglebones brought the cloak of white fox fur and placed it around his master's shoulders. Tanglebones
was very old and much taller than Elric, though his back was stooped and all his limbs seemed
knotted and twisted back on themselves, like the limbs of a strong, old tree.
 Elric walked across the dais and through the door which opened onto a corridor which led to his
private apartments.

 Yyrkoon was left fuming. He whirled round on the dais and opened his mouth as if to address the
watching courtiers. Some, who did not support him, were smiling quite openly. Yyrkoon clenched his
fists at his sides and glowered. He glared at Dyvim Tvar and opened his thin lips to speak. Dyvim Tvar
coolly returned the glare, daring Yyrkoon to say more.
 Then Yyrkoon flung back his head so that the locks of his hair, all curled and oiled, swayed against
his back. And Yyrkoon laughed.
 The harsh sound filled the hall. The music stopped. The laughter continued.
 Yyrkoon stepped up so that he stood on the dais. He dragged his heavy cloak round him so that it
engulfed his body.
 Cymoril came forward. 'Yyrkoon, please do not...' He pushed her back with a motion of his
shoulder.
 Yyrkoon walked stiffly towards the Ruby Throne. It became plain that he was about to seat himself
in it and thus perform one of the most traitorous actions possible in the code of Melnibone. Cymoril ran
the few steps to him and pulled at his arm.
 Yyrkoon's laughter grew. 'It is Yyrkoon they would wish to see on the Ruby Throne,' he told his
sister. She gasped and looked in horror at Dyvim Tvar whose face was grim and angry.
 Dyvim Tvar signed to the guards and suddenly there were two ranks of armoured men between
Yyrkoon and the throne.
 Yyrkoon glared back at the Lord of the Dragon Caves. 'You had best hope you perish with your
master,' he hissed.
 'This guard of honour will escort you from the hall,' Dyvim Tvar said evenly. 'We were all
stimulated by your conversation this evening, Prince Yyrkoon.'
 Yyrkoon paused, looked about him, then relaxed. He shrugged. 'There's time enough. If Elric will
not abdicate, then he must be deposed.'
 Cymoril's slender body was rigid. Her eyes blazed. She said to her brother:
 'If you harm Elric in any way, I will slay you myself, Yyrkoon.'
 He raised his tapering eyebrows and smiled. At that moment he seemed to hate his sister even more
than he hated his cousin. 'Your loyalty to that creature has ensured your own doom, Cymoril. I would
rather you died than that you should give birth to any progeny of his. I will not have the blood of our
house diluted, tainted--even touched--by his blood. Look to your own life, sister, before you threaten
mine.'
 And he stormed down the steps, pushing through those who came up to congratulate him. He knew
that he had lost and the murmurs of his sycophants only irritated him further.
 The great doors of the hall crashed together and closed. Yyrkoon was gone from the hall.
 Dyvim Tvar raised both his arms. 'Dance on, courtiers. Pleasure yourselves with all that the hall
provides. It is what will please the emperor most.'
 But it was plain there would be little more dancing done tonight. Courtiers were already deep in
conversation as, excitedly, they debated the events.
 Dyvim Tvar turned to Cymoril. 'Elric refuses to understand the danger, Princess Cymoril.
Yyrkoon's ambition could bring disaster to all of us.'
 'Including Yyrkoon.' Cymoril sighed.
 'Aye, including Yyrkoon. But how can we avoid this, Cymoril, if Elric will not give orders for your
brother's arrest?'
 'He believes that such as Yyrkoon should be allowed to say what they please. It is part of his
philosophy. I can barely understand it, but it seems integral to his whole belief. If he destroys Yyrkoon,
he destroys the basis on which his logic works. That at any rate, Dragon Master, is what he has tried to
explain to me.'
 Dyvim Tvar sighed and he frowned. Though unable to understand Elric, he was afraid that he could
sometimes sympathise with Yyrkoon's viewpoint. At least Yyrkoon's motives and arguments were
relatively straightforward. He knew Elric's character too well, however, to believe that Elric acted from
weakness or lassitude. The paradox was that Elric tolerated Yyrkoon's treachery because he was strong,
because he had the power to destroy Yyrkoon whenever he cared. And Yyrkoon's own character was
such that he must constantly be testing that strength of Elric's, for he knew instinctively that if Elric did
weaken and order him slain, then he would have won. It was a complicated situation and Dyvim Tvar
dearly wished that he was not embroiled in it. But his loyalty to the royal line of Melnibone was strong
and his personal loyalty to Elric was great. He considered the idea of having Yyrkoon secretly
assassinated, but he knew that such a plan would almost certainly come to nothing. Yyrkoon was a
sorcerer of immense power and doubtless would be forewarned of any attempt on his life.
 'Princess Cymoril,' said Dyvim Tvar, 'I can only pray that your brother swallows so much of his
rage that it eventually poisons him.'
 'I will join you in that prayer, Lord of the Dragon Caves.'
 Together, they left the hall.

3

Riding Through the Morning:
A Moment of Tranquillity


 THE LIGHT OF the early morning touched the tall towers of Imrryr and made them scintillate.
Each tower was of a different hue; there were a thousand soft colours. There were rose pinks and pollen
yellows, there were purples and pale greens, mauves and browns and oranges, hazy blues, whites and
powdery golds, all lovely in the sunlight. Two riders left the Dreaming City behind them and rode away
from the walls, over the green turf towards a pine forest where, among the shadowy trunks, a little of the 
night seemed to remain. Squirrels were stirring and foxes crept homeward; birds were singing and forest
flowers opened their petals and filled the air with delicate scent. A few insects wandered sluggishly aloft.
The contrast between life in the nearby city and this lazy rusticity was very great and seemed to mirror
some of the contrasts existing in the mind of at least one of the riders who now dismounted and led his
horse, walking knee-deep through a mass of blue flowers. The other rider, a girl, brought her own horse
to a halt but did not dismount. Instead, she leaned casually on her: high Melnibonean pommel and smiled
at the man, her lover.
 'Elric? Would you stop so near to Imrryr?'
 He smiled back at her, over his shoulder. 'For the moment. Our flight was hasty. I would collect my
thoughts before we ride on.'
 'How did you sleep last night?'
 'Well enough, Cymoril, though I must have dreamed without knowing it, for there were--there were
little intimations in my head when I awoke. But then, the meeting with Yyrkoon was not pleasant...'
 'Do you think he plots to use sorcery against you?'
 Elric shrugged. 'I would know if he brought a large sorcery against me. And he knows my power, I
doubt if he would dare employ wizardry.'
 'He has reason to believe you might not use your power. He has worried at your personality for so
long--is there not a danger he will begin to worry at your skills? Testing your sorcery as he has tested
your patience?'
 Elric frowned. 'Yes, I suppose there is that danger. But not yet, I should have thought.'
 'He will not be happy until you are destroyed, Elric.'
 'Or is destroyed himself, Cymoril.' Elric stooped and picked one of the flowers. He smiled. 'Your
brother is inclined to absolutes, is he not? How the weak hate weakness.'
 Cymoril took his meaning. She dismounted and came towards him. Her thin gown matched, almost
perfectly, the colour of the flowers through which she moved. He handed her the flower and she
accepted it, touching its petals with her perfect lips. 'And how the strong hate strength, my love. Yyrkoon
is my kin and yet I give you this advice--use your strength against him.'
 'I could not slay him. I have not the right.' Elric's face fell into familiar, brooding lines.
 "You could exile him.'
 'Is not exile the same as death to a Melnibonean?'
 'You, yourself, have talked of travelling in the lands of the Young Kingdoms.'
 Elric laughed somewhat bitterly. 'But perhaps I am not a true Melnibonean. Yyrkoon has said as
much--and others echo his thoughts.'
 'He hates you because you are contemplative. Your father was contemplative and no one denied that
he was a fitting emperor.'
 'My father chose not to put the results of his contemplation into his personal actions. He ruled as an
emperor should. Yyrkoon, I must admit, would also rule as an emperor should. He, too, has the
opportunity to make Melnibone great again. If he were emperor, he would embark on a campaign of
conquest to restore our trade to its former volume, to extend our power across the earth. And that is what
the majority of our folk would wish. Is it my right to deny that wish?'
 'It is your right to do what you think, for you are the emperor. All who are loyal to you think as I
do.'
 'Perhaps their loyalty is misguided. Perhaps Yyrkoon is right and I will betray that loyalty, bring
doom to the Dragon Isle?' His moody, crimson eyes looked directly into hers. 'Perhaps I should have
died as I left my mother's womb. Then Yyrkoon would have become emperor. Has Fate been thwarted?'
 'Fate is never thwarted. What has happened has happened because Fate willed it thus--if, indeed,
there is such a thing as Fate and if men's actions are not merely a response to other men's actions.'
 Elric drew a deep breath and offered her an expression tinged with irony. 'Your logic leads you
close to heresy, Cymoril, if we are to believe the traditions of Melnibone. Perhaps it would be better if 
you forgot your friendship with me.'
 She laughed. 'You begin to sound like my brother. Are you testing my love for you, my lord?'
 He began to remount his horse. 'No, Cymoril, but I would advise you to test your love yourself, for I
sense there is tragedy implicit in our love.'
 As she swung herself back into her saddle she smiled and shook her head. 'You see doom in all
things, Can you not accept the good gifts granted you? They are few enough, my lord.'
 'Aye. I'll agree with that.'
 They turned in their saddles, hearing hoofbeats behind them. Some distance away they saw a
company of yellow-clad horsemen riding about in confusion. It was their guard, which they had left
behind, wishing to ride alone.
 'Come!' cried Elric. 'Through the woods and over yonder hill and they'll never find us!'
 They spurred their steeds through the sun-speared wood and up the steep sides of the hill beyond,
racing down the other side and away across a plain where noidel bushes grew, their lush, poison fruit
glimmering a purplish blue, a night-colour which even the light of day could not disperse. There were
many such peculiar berries and herbs on Melnibone and it was to some of them that Elric owed his life.
Others were used for sorcerous potions and had been sown generations before by Elric's ancestors. Now
few Melniboneans left Imrryr even to collect these harvests. Only slaves visited the greater part of the
island, seeking the roots and the shrubs which made men dream monstrous and magnificent dreams, for
it was in their dreams that the nobles of Melnibone found most of their pleasures; they had ever been a
moody, inward-looking race and it was for this quality that Imrryr had come to be named the Dreaming
City. There, even the meanest slaves chewed berries to bring them oblivion and thus were easily
controlled, for they came to depend on their dreams. Only Elric himself refused such drugs, perhaps
because he required so many others simply to ensure his remaining alive.
 The yellow-clad guards were lost behind them and once across the plain where the noidel bushes
grew they slowed their flight and came at length to cliffs and then the sea.
 The sea shone brightly and languidly washed the white beaches below the cliffs. Seabirds wheeled
in the clear sky and their cries were distant, serving only to emphasise the sense of peace which both
Elric and Cymoril now had. In silence the lovers guided their horses down steep paths to the shore and
there they tethered the steeds and began to walk across the sand, their hair--his white, hers jet black--
waving in the wind which blew from the east.
 They found a great, dry cave which caught the sounds the sea made and replied in a whispering
echo. They removed their silken garments and made love tenderly in the shadows of the cave. They lay
in each other's arms as the day warmed and the wind dropped. Then they went to bathe in the waters,
filling the empty sky with their laughter.

 When they were dry and were dressing themselves they noticed a darkening of the horizon and Elric
said: 'We shall be wet again before we return to Imrryr. No matter how fast we ride, the storm will catch
us.'
 'Perhaps we should remain in the cave until it is past?' she suggested, coming close and holding her
soft body against him.
 'No,' he said. 'I must return soon, for there are potions in Imrryr I must take if my body is to retain
its strength. An hour or two longer and I shall begin to weaken. You have seen me weak before,
Cymoril.'
 She stroked his face and her eyes were sympathetic. 'Aye. I've seen you weak before, Elric. Come,
let's find the horses.'

 By the time they reached the horses the sky was grey overhead and full of boiling blackness not far
away in the east. They heard the grumble of thunder and the crash of lightning. The sea was threshing as
if infected by the sky's hysteria. The horses snorted and pawed at the sand, anxious to return. Even as 
Elric and Cymoril climbed into their saddles large spots of rain began to fall on their heads and spread
over their cloaks.
 Then, suddenly, they were riding at full tilt back to Imrryr while the lightning flashed around them
and the thunder roared like a furious giant, like some great old Lord of Chaos attempting to break
through, unbidden, into the Realm of Earth.
 Cymoril glanced at Elric's pale face, illuminated for a moment by a flash of sky-fire, and she felt a
chill come upon her then and the chill had nothing to do with the wind or the rain, for it seemed to her in
that second that the gentle scholar she loved had been transformed by the elements into a hell-driven
demon, into a monster with barely a semblance of humanity. His crimson eyes had flared from the
whiteness of his skull like the very flames of the Higher Hell; his hair had been whipped upward so that
it had become the crest of a sinister warhelm and, by a trick of the stormlight, his mouth had seemed
twisted in a mixture of rage and agony.
 And suddenly Cymoril knew.
 She knew, profoundly, that their morning's ride was the last moment of peace the two of them
would ever experience again. The storm was a sign from the gods themselves--a warning of storms to
come.
 She looked again at her lover. Elric was laughing. He had turned his face upward so that the warm
rain fell upon it, so that the water splashed into his open mouth. The laughter was the easy,
unsophisticated laughter of a happy child.
 Cymoril tried to laugh back, but then she had to turn her face away so that he should not see it. For
Cymoril had begun to weep.
 She was weeping still when Imrryr came in sight a black and grotesque silhouette against a line of
brightness which was the as yet untainted western horizon.


4

Prisoners:
Their Secrets Are Taken from Them

 THE MEN IN yellow armour saw Elric and Cymoril as the two approached the smallest of the
eastern gates.
 'They have found us at last,' smiled Elric through the rain, 'but somewhat belatedly, eh, Cymoril?'
 Cymoril, still embattled with her sense of doom, merely nodded and tried to smile in reply.
 Elric took this as an expression of disappointment, nothing more, and called to his guards: 'Ho,
men! Soon we shall all be dry again!'
 But the captain of the guard rode up urgently, crying: 'My lord emperor is needed at Monshanjik
 Tower where spies are held.'
 'Spies?'
 'Aye, my lord.' The man's face was pale. Water cascaded from his helm and darkened his thin cloak.
His horse was hard to control and kept sidestepping through pools of water, which had gathered
wherever the road was in disrepair. 'Caught in the maze this morning. Southern barbarians, by their
chequered dress. We are holding them until the emperor himself can question them.'
 Elric waved his hand. 'Then lead on, captain. Let's see the brave fools who dare Melnibone's seamaze.'

 The Tower of Monshanjik had been named for the wizard-architect who had designed the sea-maze
millennia before. The maze was the only means of reaching the great harbour of Imrryr and its secrets
had been carefully guarded, for it was their greatest protection against sudden attack. The maze was
complicated and pilots had to be specially trained to steer ships through it. Before the maze had been 
built, the harbour had been a kind of 'inland lagoon, fed by the sea which swept in through a system of
natural caverns in the towering cliff which rose between lagoon and ocean. There were five separate
routes through the sea-maze and any individual pilot knew but one. In the outer wall of the cliff there
were five entrances. Here Young Kingdom ships waited until a pilot came aboard. Then one of the gates
to one of the entrances would be lifted, all aboard the ship would be blindfolded and sent below save for
the oar-master and the steersman who would also be masked in heavy steel helms so that they could see
nothing, do nothing but obey the complicated instructions of the pilot. And if a Young Kingdom ship
should fail to obey any of those instructions and should crush itself against the rock walls, well
Melnibone did not mourn for it and any survivors from the crew would be taken as slaves. All who
sought to trade with the Dreaming City understood the risks, but scores of merchants came every month
to dare the dangers of the maze and trade their own poor goods for the splendid riches of Melnibone.
 The Tower of Monshanjik stood overlooking the harbour and the massive mole which jutted out
into the middle of the lagoon. It was a sea-green tower and was squat compared with most of those in
Imrryr, though still a beautiful and tapering construction, with wide windows so that the whole of the
harbour could be seen from it. From Monshanjik Tower most of the business of the harbour was done
and in its lower cellars were kept any prisoners who had broken any of the myriad rules governing the
functioning of the harbour. Leaving Cymoril to return to the palace with a guard, Elric entered the tower,
riding through the great archway at the base, scattering not a few merchants who were waiting for
permission to begin their bartering, for the whole of the ground floor was full of sailors, merchants and
Melnibonean officials engaged in the business of trade, though it was not here that the actual wares were
displayed. The great echoing babble of a thousand voices engaged in a thousand separate aspects of
bargaining slowly stilled as Elric and his guard rode arrogantly through to another dark arch at the far
end of the hall. This arch opened onto a ramp which sloped and curved down into the bowels of the
tower.
 Down this ramp clattered the horsemen, passing slaves, servants and officials who stepped hastily
aside, bowing low as they recognised the emperor. Great brands illuminated the tunnel, guttering and
smoking and casting distorted shadows onto the smooth, obsidian walls. A chill was in the air now, and a
dampness, for water washed about the outer walls below the quays of Imrryr. And still the emperor rode
on and still the ramp struck lower through the glassy rock. And then a wave of heat rose to meet them
and shifting light could be seen ahead and they passed into a chamber that was full of smoke and the
scent of fear. From the low ceiling hung chains and from eight of the chains, swinging by their feet, hung
four people. Their clothes had been torn from them, but their bodies were clothed in blood from tiny
wounds, precise but severe, made by the artist who stood, scalpel in hand, surveying his handiwork.
 The artist was tail and very thin, almost like a skeleton in his stained, white garments. His lips were
thin, his eyes were slits, his fingers were thin, his hair was thin and the scalpel he held was thin, too,
almost invisible save when it flashed in the light from the fire which erupted from a pit on the far side of
the cavern. The artist was named Doctor Jest and the art he practised was a performing art rather than a
creative one (though he could argue otherwise with some conviction): the art of drawing secrets from
those who kept them. Doctor Jest was the Chief Interrogator of Melnibone. He turned sinuously as Elric
entered, the scalpel held between the thin thumb and the thin forefinger of his fight hand; he stood poised
and expectant, almost like a dancer, and then bowed from the waist.
 'My sweet emperor!' His voice was thin. It rushed from his thin throat as if bent on escape and one
was inclined to wonder if one had heard the words at all, so quickly had they come and gone.
 'Doctor. Are these the southlanders caught this morning?'
 'Indeed they are, my lord.' Another sinuous bow. 'For your pleasure.'
 Coldly Elric inspected the prisoners. He felt no sympathy for them. They were spies. Their actions
had led them to this pass. They had known what would happen to them if caught. But one of them was a
boy and another a woman, it appeared, though they writhed so in their chains it was quite difficult to tell
at first. It seemed a shame. Then the woman snapped what remained of her teeth at him and hissed: 
'Demon!' And Elric stepped back, saying:
 'Have they informed you of what they were doing in our maze, doctor?'
 'They still tantalise me with hints. They have a fine sense of drama. I appreciate that. They are here,
I would say, to map a route through the maze which a force of raiders might then follow: But they have
so far withheld the details. That is the game. We ail understand how it must be played.'
 'And when will they tell you, Doctor Jest?'
 'Oh, very soon, my lord.'
 'It would be best to know if we are to expect attackers. The sooner we know, the less time we shall
lose dealing with the attack when it comes. Do you not agree, doctor?'
 'I do, my lord.'
 'Very well.' Elric was irritated by this break in his day. It had spoiled the pleasure of the ride, it had
brought him face to face with his duties too quickly.
 Doctor Jest returned to his charges and, reaching out with his free hand, expertly seized the genitals
of one of the male prisoners. The scalpel flashed. There was a groan. Doctor Jest tossed something onto
the fire. Elric sat in the chair prepared for him. He was bored rather than disgusted by the rituals
attendant upon the gathering of information and the discordant screams, the clash of the chains, the thin
whisperings of Doctor Jest, all served to ruin the feeling of well-being he had retained even as he
reached the chamber. But it was one of his kingly duties to attend such rituals and attend this one he
must until the information was presented to him and he could congratulate his Chief Interrogator and
issue orders as to the means of dealing with any attack and even when that was over he must confer with
admirals and with generals, probably through the rest of the night, choosing between arguments,
deciding on the deposition of men and ships. With a poorly disguised yawn he leaned back and watched
as Doctor Jest ran fingers and scalpel, tongue, tongs and pincers over the bodies. He was soon thinking'
of other matters: philosophical problems which he had still failed to resolve.
 It was not that Elric was inhumane; it was that he was, still, a Melnibonean. He had been used to
such sights since childhood. He could not have saved the prisoners, even if he had desired, without going
against every tradition of the Dragon Isle. And in this case it was a simple matter of a threat being met by
the best methods available. He had become used to shutting off those feelings which conflicted with his
duties as emperor. If there had been any point in freeing the four who danced now at Doctor Jest's
pleasure he would have freed them, but there was no point and the four would have been astonished if
they had received any other treatment than this. Where moral decisions were concerned Elric was, by
and large, practical. He would make his decision in the context of what action he could take. In this case,
he could take no action. Such a reaction had become second nature to him. His desire was not to reform
Melnibone but to reform himself, not to initiate action but to know the best way of responding to the
actions of others. Here, the decision was easy to make. A spy was an aggressor. One defended oneself
against aggressors in the best possible way. The methods employed by Doctor Jest were the best
methods.
 'My lord?'
 Absently, Elric looked up.
 'We have the information now, my lord.' Doctor Jest's thin voice whispered across the chamber.
Two sets of chains were now empty and slaves were gathering things up from the floor and flinging them
on the fire. The two remaining shapeless lumps reminded Elric of meat carefully prepared by a chef.
 One of the lumps still quivered a little, but the other was still.
 Doctor Jest slid his instruments into a thin case he carried in a pouch at his belt. His white garments
were almost completely covered in stains.
 'It seems there have been other spies before these,' Doctor Jest told his master. 'These came merely
to confirm the route. If they do not return in time, the barbarians will still sail.'
 'But surely they will know that we expect them?' Elric said.
 'Probably not, my lord. Rumours have been spread amongst the Young Kingdom merchants and 
sailors that four spies were seen in the maze and were speared--slain whilst trying to escape.'
 'I see.' Elric frowned. 'Then our best plan will be to lay a trap for the raiders.'
 'Aye, my lord.'
 'You know the route they have chosen?'
 'Aye, my lord.'
 Elric turned to one of his guards. 'Have messages sent to all our generals and admirals. What's the
hour?'
 'The hour of sunset is just past, my liege.'
 'Tell them to assemble before the Ruby Throne at two hours past sunset.'
 Wearily, Elric rose. 'You have done well, as usual, Doctor Jest.'
 The thin artist bowed low, seeming to fold himself in two. A thin and somewhat unctuous sigh was
his reply.


5

A Battle: The King Proves His
War-Skill

 YYRKOON WAS THE first to arrive, all clad in martial finery, accompanied by two massive
guards, each holding one of the prince's ornate war-banners.
 'My emperor!' Yyrkoon's shout was proud and disdainful. 'Would you let me command the
warriors? It will relieve you of that care when, doubtless, you have many other concerns with which to
occupy your time.'
 Elric replied impatiently: 'You are most thoughtful, Prince Yyrkoon, but fear not for me. I shall
command the armies and the navies of Melnibone, for that is the duty of the emperor.'
 Yyrkoon glowered and stepped to one side as Dyvim Tvar, Lord of the Dragon Caves, entered. He
had no guard whatsoever with him and it seemed he had dressed hastily. He carried his helmet under his
arm.
 'My emperor--I bring news of the dragons...'
 'I thank you, Dyvim Tvar, but wait until all my commanders are assembled and impart that news to
them, too.'
 Dyvim Tvar bowed and went to stand on the opposite side of the hall to that on which Prince
Yyrkoon stood.
 Gradually the warriors arrived until a score of great captains waited at the foot of the steps which
led to the Ruby Throne where Elric sat. Elric himself still wore the clothes in which he had gone riding
that morning. He had not had time to change and had until a little while before been consulting maps of
the mazes-maps which only he could read and which, at normal times, were hidden by magical means
from any who might attempt to find them.
 'Southlanders would steal Imrryr's wealth and slay us all,' Elric began. 'They believe they have
found a way through our sea-maze. A fleet of a hundred warships sails on Melnibone even now.
Tomorrow it will wait below the horizon until dusk, then it will sail to the maze and enter. By midnight it
expects to reach the harbour and to have taken the Dreaming City before dawn. Is that possible, I
wonder?'
 'No!' Many spoke the single word.
 'No.' Elric smiled. 'But how shall we best enjoy this little war they offer us?'
 Yyrkoon, as ever, was first to shout. 'Let us go to meet them now, with dragons and with battlebarges.
Let us pursue them to their own land and take their war to them. Let us attack their nations and
burn their cities! Let us conquer them and thus ensure our own security!'
 Dyvim Tvar spoke up again:
 'No dragons,' he said.
 'What?' Yyrkoon whirled. 'What?'
 'No dragons, prince. They will not be awakened. The dragons sleep in their caverns, exhausted by
their last engagement on your behalf.'
 'Mine?'
 'You would use them in our conflict with the Vilmirian pirates. I told you that I would prefer to save
them for a larger engagement. But you flew them against the pirates and you burned their little boats and
now the dragons sleep.'
 Yyrkoon glowered. He looked up at Elric. 'I did not expect...'
 Elric raised his hand. 'We need not use our dragons until such a time as we really need them. This
attack from the southlander fleet is nothing. But we will conserve our strength if we bide our time. Let
them think we are unready. Let them enter the maze. Once the whole hundred are through, we close in,
blocking off all routes in or out of the maze. Trapped, they will be crushed by us.'
 Yyrkoon looked pettishly at his feet, evidently wishing he could think of some flaw in the plan.
Tall, old Admiral Magum Colim in his sea-green armour stepped forward and bowed. 'The golden battlebarges
of Imrryr are ready to defend their city, my liege. It will take time, however, to manoeuvre them
into position. It is doubtful if all will fit into the maze at once.'
 'Then sail some of them out now and hide them around the coast, so that they can wait for any
survivors that may escape our attack,' Elric instructed him.
 'A useful plan, my liege.' Magum Colim bowed and sank back into the crowd of his peers.
 The debate continued for some time and then they were ready and about to leave. But then Prince
Yyrkoon bellowed once more:
 'I repeat my offer to the emperor. His person is too valuable to risk in battle. My person--it is
worthless. Let me command the warriors of both land and sea while the emperor may remain at the
palace, untroubled by the battle, confident that it will be won and the southlanders trounced--perhaps
there is a book he wishes to finish?'
 Elric smiled. 'Again I thank you for your concern, Prince Yyrkoon. But an emperor must exercise
his body as well as his mind. I will command the warriors tomorrow.'
 When Elric arrived back at his apartments it was to discover that Tanglebones had already laid out
his heavy, black wargear. Here was the armour which had served a hundred Melnibonean emperors; an
armour which was forged by sorcery to give it a strength unequalled on the Realm of Earth, which could,
so rumour went, even withstand the bite of the mythical runeblades, Stormbringer and Mournblade,
which had been wielded by the wickedest of Melnibone's many wicked rulers before being seized by the
Lords of the Higher Worlds and hidden forever in a realm where even those Lords might rarely venture.
 The face of the tangled man was full of joy as he touched each piece of armour, each finely
balanced weapon, with his long, gnarled fingers. His seamed face looked up to regard Elric's careravaged
features. 'Oh, my lord! Oh, my king! Soon you will know the joy of the fight!'
 'Aye, Tanglebones--and let us hope it will be a joy.'
 'I taught you all the skills--the art of the sword and the poignard--the art of the bow--the art of the
spear, both mounted and on foot. And you learned well, for all they say you are weak. Save one, there's
no better swordsman in Melnibone.'
 'Prince Yyrkoon could be better than me,' Elric said reflectively. 'Could he not?'
 'I said "save one", my lord.'
 'And Yyrkoon is that one. Well, one day perhaps we'll be able to test the matter. I'll bathe before I
don all that metal.'
 'Best make speed, master. From what I hear, there is much to do.'
 'And I'll sleep after I've bathed.' Elric smiled at his old friend's consternation. 'It will be better thus,
for I cannot personally direct the barges into position. I am needed to command the fray--and that I will 
do better when I've rested.'
 'If you think it good, lord king, then it is good.'
 'And you are astonished. You are too eager, Tanglebones, to get me into all that stuff and see me
strut about in it as if I were Arioch himself...'
 Tanglebones's hand flew to his mouth as if he had spoken the words, not his master, and he was
trying to block them. His eyes widened.
 Elric laughed. 'You think I speak bold heresies, eh? Well, I've spoken worse without any ill
befalling me. On Melnibone, Tanglebones, the emperors control the demons, not the reverse.'
 'So you say, my liege.'
 'It is the truth.' Elric swept from the room, calling for his slaves. The war-fever filled him and he
was jubilant.

 Now he was in all his black gear: the massive breastplate, the padded jerkin, the long greaves, the
mail gauntlets. At his side was a five-foot broadsword which, it was said, had belonged to a human hero
called Aubec. Resting on the deck against the golden rail of the bridge was the great round warboard, his
shield, bearing the sign of the swooping dragon. And a helm was on his head; a black helm, with a
dragon's head craning over the peak, and dragon's wings flaring backward above it, and a dragon's tail
curling down the back. All the helm was black, but within the helm there was a white shadow from
which glared two crimson orbs, and from the sides of the helm strayed wisps of milk-white hair, almost
like smoke escaping from a burning building. And, as the helm turned in what little light came from the
lantern hanging at the base of the mainmast, the white shadow sharpened to reveal features--fine,
handsome features--a straight nose, curved lips, up-slanting eyes. The face Of Emperor Elric of
Melnibone peered into the gloom of the maze as he listened for the first sounds of the sea-raider's
approach.
 He stood on the high bridge of the great golden battle-barge which, like all its kind, resembled a
floating ziggurat equipped with masts and sails and oars and catapults. The ship was called The Son of
the Pyaray and it was the flagship of the fleet. The Grand Admiral Magum Colim stood beside Elric.
Like Dyvim Tvar, the admiral was one of Elric's few close friends. He had known Elric all his life and
had encouraged him to learn all he could concerning the running of fighting ships and fighting fleets.
Privately Magum Colim might fear that Elric was too scholarly and introspective to rule Melnibone, but
he accepted Elric's right to rule and was made angry and impatient by the talk of the likes of Yyrkoon.
Prince Yyrkoon was also aboard the flagship, though at this moment he was below, inspecting the warengines.
 The Son of the Pyaray lay at anchor in a huge grotto, one of hundreds built into the walls of the
maze when the maze itself was built, and designed for just this purpose--to hide a battle-barge. There
was just enough height for the masts and enough width for the oars to move freely. Each of the golden
battle-barges was equipped with banks of oars, each bank containing between twenty and thirty oars on
either side. The banks were four, five or six decks high and, as in the case of The Son of the Pyaray,
might have three independent steering systems, fore and aft. Being armoured all in gold, the ships were
virtually indestructible, and, for all their massive size, they could move swiftly and manoeuvre delicately
when occasion demanded. It was not the first time they had waited for their enemies in these grottoes. It
would not be the last (though when next they waited it would be in greatly different circumstances).
 The battle-barges of Melnibone were rarely seen on the open seas these days, but once they had
sailed the oceans of the world like fearsome floating mountains of gold and .they had brought terror
whenever they were sighted. The fleet had been larger then, comprising hundreds of craft. Now there
were less than forty ships. But forty would suffice. Now, in damp darkness, they awaited their enemies.
 Listening to the hollow slap of the water against the sides of the ship, Elric wished that he had been
able to conceive a better plan than this. He was sure that this one would work, but he regretted the waste
of lives, both Melnibonean and barbarian. It would have been better if some way could have been 
devised of frightening the barbarians away rather than trapping them in the sea-maze. The southlander
fleet was not the first to have been attracted by Imrryr's fabulous wealth. The southlander crews were not
the first to entertain the belief that the Melniboneans, because they never now ventured far from the
Dreaming City, had become decadent and unable to defend their treasures. And so the southlanders must
be destroyed in order to make the lesson clear. Melnibone was still strong. She was strong enough, in
Yyrkoon's view, to resume her former dominance of the world--strong in sorcery if not in soldiery.
 'Hist!' Admiral Magum Colim craned forward.
 'Was that the sound of an oar?'
 Elric nodded. 'I think so.'
 Now they heard regular splashes, as of rows of oars dipping in and out of the water, and they heard
the creak of timbers. The southlanders were corning. The Son of the Pyaray was the ship nearest to the
entrance and it would be the first to move out, but only when the last of the southlanders' ships had
passed them. Admiral Magum Colim bent and extinguished the lantern, then, quickly, quietly, he
descended to inform his crew of the raiders' coming.
 Not long before, Yyrkoon had used his sorcery to summon a peculiar mist, which hid the golden
barges from view, but through which those on the Melnibonean ships could peer. Now Elric saw torches
burning in the channel ahead as carefully the reavers negotiated the maze. Within the space of a few
minutes ten of the galleys had passed the grotto. Admiral Magum Colim rejoined Elric on the bridge and
now Prince Yyrkoon was with him. Yyrkoon, too, wore a dragon helm, though less magnificent than
Elric's, for Elric was chief of the few surviving Dragon Princes of Melnibone. Yyrkoon was grinning
through the gloom and his eyes gleamed in anticipation of the bloodletting to come. Elric wished that
Prince Yyrkoon had chosen another ship than this, but it was Yyrkoon's right to be aboard the flagship
and he could not deny it.
 Now half the hundred vessels had gone past.
 Yyrkoon's armour creaked as, impatiently, he waited, pacing the bridge, his gauntletted hand on the
hilt of his broadsword. 'Soon' he kept saying to himself. 'Soon.'
 And then their anchor was groaning upwards and their oars were plunging into the water as the last
southland ship went by and they shot from the grotto into the channel ramming the enemy galley
amidships and smashing it in two.
 A great yell went up from the barbarian crew. Men were flung in all directions. Torches danced
erratically on the remains of the deck as men tried to save themselves from slipping into the dark, chill
waters of the channel. A few brave spears rattled against the sides of the Melnibonean flag-galley as it
began to turn amongst the debris it had created. But Imrryrian archers returned the shots and the few
survivors went down.
 The sound of this swift conflict was the signal to the other battle-barges. In perfect order they came
from both sides of the high rock walls and it must have seemed to the astonished barbarians that the great
golden ships had actually emerged from solid stone--ghost ships filled with demons who rained spears,
arrows and brands upon them. Now the whole of the twisting channel was confusion and a medley of
war-shouts echoed and boomed and the clash of steel upon steel was like the savage hissing of some
monstrous snake, and the raiding fleet itself resembled a snake which had been broken into a hundred
pieces by the tall, implacable golden ships of Melnibone. These ships seemed almost serene as they
moved against their enemies, their grappling irons flashing out to catch wooden decks and rails and draw
the galleys nearer so that they might be destroyed.
 But the southlanders were brave and they kept their heads after their initial astonishment. Three of
their galleys headed directly for The Son of the Pyaray, recognising it as the flagship. Fire arrows sailed
high and dropped down into the decks which were wooden and not protected by the golden armour,
starting fires wherever they fell, or else bringing blazing death to the men they struck.
 Elric raised his shield above his head and two arrows struck it, bouncing, still flaring, to a lower
deck. He leapt over the rail, following the arrows, jumping down to the widest and most exposed deck 
where his warriors were grouping, ready to deal with the attacking galleys. Catapults thudded and balls
of blue fire swished through the blackness, narrowly missing all three galleys. Another volley followed
and one mass of flame struck the far galley's mast and then burst upon the deck, scattering huge flames
wherever it touched. Grapples snaked out and seized the first galley, dragging it close and Elric was
amongst the first to leap down onto the deck, rushing forward to where he saw the southland captain,
dressed all in crude, chequered armour, a chequered surcoat over that, a big sword in both his huge
hands, bellowing at his men to resist the Melnibonean dogs.
 As Elric approached the bridge three barbarians armed with curved swords and small, oblong
shields ran at him. Their faces were full of fear, but there was determination there as well, as if they
knew they must die but planned to wreak as much destruction as they could before their souls were
taken.
 Shifting his war-board onto his arm, Elric took his own broadsword in both hands and Charged the
sailors, knocking one off his feet with the lip of the-shield and smashing the collar-bone of another. The
remaining barbarian skipped aside and thrust his curved sword at Elric's face. Elric barely escaped the
thrust and the sharp edge of the sword grazed his cheek, bringing out a drop or two of blood. Elric swung
the broadsword like a scythe and it bit deep into the barbarian's waist, almost cutting him in two. He
struggled for a moment, unable to believe that he was dead but then, as Elric yanked the sword free, he
closed his eyes and dropped. The man who had been struck by Elric's shield was staggering to his feet as
Elric whirled, saw him, and smashed the broadsword into his skull. Now the way was clear to the bridge.
Elric began to climb the ladder, noting that the captain had seen him and was waiting for him at the top.
 Elric raised his shield to take the captain's first blow. Through all the noise he thought he heard the
man shouting at him.
 'Die, you white-faced demon! Die! You have no place in this earth any longer!'
 Elric was almost diverted from defending himself by these words. They rang true to him. Perhaps
he really had no place on the earth, perhaps that was why Melnibone was slowly collapsing, why fewer
children were born every year, why the dragons themselves were no longer breeding. He let the captain
strike another blow at the shield, then he reached under it and swung at the man's legs. But the captain
had anticipated the move and jumped backwards. This, however, gave Elric time to run up the few
remaining steps and stand on the deck, facing the captain.
 The man's face was almost as pale as Elric's. He was sweating and he was panting and his eyes had
misery in them as well as a wild fear.
 'You should leave us alone,' Elric heard himself saying. 'We offer you no harm, barbarian. When
did Melnibone last sail against the Young Kingdoms?'
 'You offer us harm by your very presence, Whiteface. There is your sorcery. There are your
customs. And there is your arrogance.'
 'Is that why you came here? Was your attack motivated by disgust for us? Or would you help
yourselves to our wealth? Admit it, captain--greed brought you to Melnibone.'
 'At least greed is an honest quality, an understandable one. But you creatures are not human. Worse--
you are not gods, though you behave as if you were. Your day is over and you must be wiped
 out, your city destroyed, your sorceries forgotten.'
 Elric nodded. 'Perhaps you are right, captain.'
 'I am right. Our holy men say so. Our seers predict your downfall. The Chaos Lords whom you
serve will themselves bring about that downfall.'
 'The Chaos Lords no longer have any interest in the affairs of Melnibone. They took away their
power nearly a thousand years since.' Elric watched the captain carefully, judging the distance between
them. 'Perhaps that is why our own power waned. Or perhaps we merely became tired of power.'
 'Be that as it may,' the captain said, wiping his sweating brow, 'your time is over. You must be
destroyed once and for all.' And then he groaned, for Elric's broadsword had come under his chequered
breastplate and gone up through his stomach and into his lungs.
 One knee bent, one leg stretched behind him, Elric began to withdraw the long sword, looking up
into the barbarian's face which had now assumed an expression of reconciliation. 'That was unfair,
Whiteface. We had barely begun to talk and you cut the conversation short. You are most skillful. May
you writhe forever in the Higher Hell. Farewell.'
 Elric hardly knew why, after the captain had fallen face down on the deck, he hacked twice at the
neck until the head rolled off the body, rolled to the side of the bridge and was then kicked over the side
so that it sank into the cold, deep water.
 And then Yyrkoon came up behind Elric and he was still grinning.
 'You fight fiercely and well, my lord emperor. That dead man was right.'
 'Right?' Elric glared at his cousin. 'Right?'
 'Aye--in his assessment of your prowess.' And, chuckling, Yyrkoon went to supervise his men who
were finishing off the few remaining raiders.
 Elric did not know why he had refused to hate Yyrkoon before. But now he did hate Yyrkoon. At
that moment he would gladly have slain him. It was as if Yyrkoon had looked deeply into Elric's soul
and expressed contempt for what he had seen there.
 Suddenly Elric was overwhelmed by an angry misery and he wished with all his heart that he was
not a Melnibonean, that he was not an emperor and that Yyrkoon had never been born.


6

Pursuit:
A Deliberate Treachery

 LIKE HAUGHTY Leviathans the great golden battle-barges swam through the wreckage of the
reaver fleet. A few ships burned and a few were still sinking, but most had sunk into the unplumbable
depths of the channel. The burning ships sent strange shadows dancing against the dank walls of the seacaverns,
as if the ghosts of the slain offered a last salute before departing to the sea-depths where, it was
said, a Chaos king still ruled, crewing his eerie fleets with the souls of all who died in conflict upon the
oceans of the world. Or perhaps they went to a gentler doom, serving Straasha, Lord of the Water
Elementals, who ruled the upper reaches of the sea.
 But a few had escaped. Somehow the southland sailors had got past the massive battle-barges,
sailed back through the channel and must even now have reached the open sea. This was reported to the
flagship where Elric, Magum Colim and Prince Yyrkoon now stood together again on the bridge,
surveying the destruction they had wreaked.
 'Then we must pursue them and finish them, 'said Yyrkoon. He was sweating and his dark face
glistened; his eyes were alight with fever. 'We must follow them.'
 Elric shrugged. He was weak. He had brought no extra drugs with him to replenish his strength. He
wished to go back to Imrryr and rest. He was tired of bloodletting, tired of Yyrkoon and tired, most of
all, of himself. The hatred he felt for his cousin was draining him still further--and he hated the hatred;
that was the worst part. 'No,' he said. 'Let them go.'
 'Let them go? Unpunished? Come now, my lord king! That is not our way!' Prince Yyrkoon turned
to the aging admiral. 'Is that our way, Admiral Magum Colim?'
 Magum Colim shrugged. He, too, was tired, but privately he agreed with Prince Yyrkoon. An
enemy of Melnibone should be punished for daring even to think of attacking the Dreaming City. Yet he
said: 'The emperor must decide.'
 'Let them go,' said Elric again. He leant heavily against the rail. 'Let them carry the news back to
their own barbarian land. Let them say how the Dragon Princes defeated them. The news will spread. I
believe we shall not be troubled by raiders again for some time.'
 'The Young Kingdoms are full of fools,' Yyrkoon replied. 'They will not believe the news. There
will always be raiders. The best way to warn them will be to make sure that not one southlander remains
alive or uncaptured.'
 Elric drew a deep breath and tried to fight the faintness which threatened to overwhelm him. 'Prince
Yyrkoon, you are trying my patience...'
 'But, my emperor, I think only of the good of Melnibone. Surely you do not want your people to say
that you are weak, that you fear a fight with but five southland galleys?'
 This time Elric's anger brought him strength. 'Who will say that Elric is weak? Will it be you,
Yyrkoon?' He knew that his next statement was senseless, but there was nothing he could do to stop it.
'Very well, let us pursue these poor little boats and sink them. And let us make haste. I am weary of it
all.'
 There was a mysterious light in Yyrkoon's eyes as he turned away to relay the orders.

 The sky was turning from black to grey when the Melnibonean fleet reached the open sea and
turned its prows south towards the Boiling Sea and the southern continent beyond. The barbarian ships
would not sail through the Boiling Sea--no mortal ship could do that, it was said--but would sail around
it. Not that the barbarian ships would even reach the edges of the Boiling Sea, for the huge battle-barges
were fast-sailing vessels. The slaves who pulled the oars were full of a drug which increased their speed
and their strength for a score or so of hours, before it slew them. And now the sails billowed out,
catching the breeze. Golden mountains, skimming rapidly over the sea, these ships; their method of
construction was a secret lost even to the Melniboneans (who had forgotten so much of their lore). It was
easy to imagine how men of the Young Kingdoms hated Melnibone and its inventions, for it did seem
that the battle-barges belonged to an older, alien age, as they bore down upon the fleeing galleys now
sighted on the horizon.
 The Son of the Pyaray was in the lead of the rest of the fleet and was priming its catapults well
before any of its fellows had seen the enemy. Perspiring slaves gingerly manhandled the viscous stuff of
the fireballs, getting them into the bronze cups of the catapults by means of long, spoon-ended tongs. It
flickered in the pre-dawn gloom.
 Now slaves climbed the steps to the bridge and brought wine and food on platinum platters for the
three Dragon Princes who had remained there since the pursuit had begun. Elric could not summon the
strength to eat, but he seized a tall cup of yellow wine and drained it. The stuff was strong and revived
him a trifle. He had another cup poured and drank that as swiftly as the other. He peered ahead. It was
almost dawn. There was a line of purple light on the horizon. 'At the first sign of the sun's disc,' Elric
said, 'let loose the fireballs.'
 'I will give the order,' said Magum Colim, wiping his lips and putting down the meat bone on which
he had been chewing. He left the bridge. Elric heard his feet striking the steps heavily. All at once the
albino felt surrounded by enemies. There had been something strange in Magum Colim's manner during
the argument with Prince Yyrkoon. Elric tried to shake off such foolish thoughts. But the weariness, the
self-doubt, the open mockery of his cousin, all succeeded in increasing the feeling that he was alone and
without friends in the world. Even Cymoril and Dyvim Tvar were, finally, Melniboneans and could not
understand the peculiar concerns which moved him and dictated his actions. Perhaps it would be wise to
renounce everything Melnibonean and wander the world as an anonymous soldier of fortune, serving
whoever needed his aid?
 The dull red semicircle of the sun showed above the black line of the distant water. There came a
series of booming sounds from the forward decks of the flagship as the catapults released their fiery shot;
there was a whistling scream, fading away, and it seemed that a dozen meteors leapt through the sky,
hurtling towards the five galleys which Were now little more than thirty ship-lengths away.
 Elric saw two galleys flare, but the remaining three began to sail a zig-zag course and avoided the
fireballs which landed on the water and burned fitfully for a while before sinking (still burning) into the 
depths.
 More fireballs were prepared and Elric heard Yyrkoon shout from the other side of the bridge,
ordering the slaves to greater exertions. Then the fleeing vessels changed their tactics, evidently realising
that they could not save themselves for long, and, spreading out, sailed towards The Son of the Pyaray,
just as the other ships had done in the sea-maze. It was not merely their courage that Elric admired but
their manoeuvring skill and the speed at which they had arrived at this logical, if hopeless, decision.
 The sun was behind the southland ships as they turned. Three brave silhouettes drew nearer to the
Melnibonean flagship as scarlet stained the sea, as if in anticipation of the bloodletting to come.
 Another volley of fireballs was flung from the flagship and the leading galley tried to tack round
and avoid it, but two of the fiery globes spattered directly on its deck and soon the whole ship was alive
with flame. Burning men leapt into the water. Burning men shot arrows at the flagship. Burning men fell
slowly from their Positions in the rigging. The burning men died, but the burning ship came on; someone
had lashed the steering arm and directed the galley at The Son of the Pyaray. It crashed into the golden
side of the battle-barge and some of the fire splashed on the deck where the main catapults were in
position. A cauldron containing the fire-stuff caught and immediately men were running from all
quarters of the ship to try to douse the flame. Elric grinned as he saw what the barbarians had done.
Perhaps that ship had deliberately allowed itself to be fired. Now the majority of the flagship's
complement was engaged with putting out the blaze--while the southland ships drew alongside, threw up
their own grapples, and began to board.
 'Ware boarders!' Elric shouted, long after he might have warned his crew. 'Barbarians attack.'
 He saw Yyrkoon whirl round, see the situation, and rush down the steps from the bridge. 'You stay
there, my lord king,' he flung at Elric as he disappeared. 'You are plainly too weary to fight.'
 And Elric summoned all that was left of his strength and stumbled after his cousin, to help in the
defense of the ship.
 The barbarians were not fighting for their lives--they knew those to be taken already. They were
fighting for their pride. They wanted to take one Melnibonean ship down with them and that ship must
be the flagship itself. It was hard to be contemptuous of such men. They knew that even if they took the
flagship the other ships of the golden fleet would soon overwhelm them.
 But the other ships were still some distance away. Many lives would be lost before they reached the
flagship.
 On the lowest deck Elric found himself facing a pair of tall barbarians, each armed with a curved
blade and a small, oblong shield. He lunged forward, but his armour seemed to drag at his limbs, his own
shield and sword were so heavy that he could barely lift them. Two swords struck his helm, almost
simultaneously. He lunged back and caught a man in the arm, rammed the other with his shield. A
curved blade clanged on his backplate and he all but lost his footing. There was choking smoke
everywhere, and heat, and the tumult of battle. Desperately he swung about him and felt his broadsword
bite deep into flesh. One of his opponents fell, gurgling, with blood spouting from his mouth and nose.
The other lunged. Elric stepped backwards, fell over the corpse of the man he had slain, and went down,
his broadsword held out before him in one hand. And as the triumphant barbarian leapt forward to finish
the albino, Elric caught him on the point of the broadsword, running him through. The dead man fell
towards Elric who did not feel the impact, for he had already fainted. Not for the first time had his
deficient blood, no longer enriched by drugs, betrayed him.

 He tasted salt and thought at first it was blood. But it was sea water. A wave had risen over the deck
and momentarily revived him. He struggled to crawl from under the dead man and then he heard a voice
he recognised. He twisted his head and looked up.
 Prince Yyrkoon stood there. He was grinning. He was full of glee at Elric's plight. Black, oily
smoke still drifted everywhere, but the sounds of the fight had died.
 'Are--are we victorious, cousin?' Elric spoke painfully.
 'Aye. The barbarians are all dead now. We are about to sail for Imrryr.'
 Elric was relieved. He would begin to die soon if he could not get to his store of potions.
 His relief must have been evident, for Yyrkoon laughed. 'It is as well the battle did not last longer,
my lord, or we should have been without our leader.'
 'Help me up, cousin.' Elric hated to ask Prince Yyrkoon any favour, but he had no choice. He
stretched out his empty hand. 'I am fit enough to inspect the ship.'
 Yyrkoon came forward as if to take the hand, but then he hesitated, still grinning. 'But, my lord, I
disagree. You will be dead by the time this ship turns eastward again.'
 'Nonsense. Even without the drugs I can live for a considerable time, though movement is difficult.
Help me up, Yyrkoon, I command you.'
 'You cannot command me, Elric. I am emperor now, you see.'
 'Be wary, cousin. I can overlook such treachery, but others will not. I shall be forced to...'
 Yyrkoon swung his legs over Elric's body and went to the rail. Here were bolts which fixed one
section of the rail in place when it was not used for the gangplank. Yyrkoon slowly released the bolts and
kicked the section of rail into the water.
 Now Elric's efforts to free himself became more desperate. But he could hardly move at all.
 Yyrkoon, on the other hand, seemed possessed of unnatural strength. He bent and easily flung the
corpse away from Elric.
 'Yyrkoon,' said Elric, 'this is unwise of you.'
 'I was never a cautious man, cousin, as well as you know.' Yyrkoon placed a booted foot against
Elric's ribs and began to shove. Elric slid towards the gap in the rail. He could see the black sea heaving
below. 'Farewell, Elric. Now a true Melnibonean shall sit upon the Ruby Throne. And, who knows,
might even make Cymoril his queen? It has not been unheard of...'
 And Elric felt himself rolling, felt himself fall, felt himself strike the water, felt his armour pulling
him below the surface. And Yyrkoon's last words drummed in Elric's ears like the persistent booming of
the waves against the sides of the golden battle-barge.



BOOK TWO


 Less certain of himself or his destiny than ever, the albino king must perforce bring his powers of
sorcery into play, conscious that he has embarked upon a course of action by no means at one with his
original conception of the way he wished to live his life. And now matters must be settled. He must
begin to rule. He must become cruel. But even in this he will find himself thwarted.


1

The Caverns of the Sea King

 ELRIC SANK RAPIDLY, desperately trying to keep the last of his breath in his body. He had no
strength to swim and the weight of the armour denied any hope of his rising to the surface and being
sighted by Magum Colim or one of the others still loyal to him.
 The roaring in his ears gradually faded to a whisper so that it sounded as if little voices were
speaking to him, the voices of the water elementals with whom, in his youth, he had had a kind of
friendship. And the pain in his lungs faded; the red mist cleared from his eyes and he thought he saw the
face of his father, Sadric, of Cymoril and, fleetingly, of Yyrkoon. Stupid Yyrkoon: for all that he prided
himself that he was a Melnibonean, he lacked the Melnibonean subtlety. He was as brutal and direct as 
some of the Young Kingdom barbarians he so much despised. And now Elric began to feel almost
grateful to his cousin. His life was over. The conflicts which tore his mind would no longer trouble him.
His fears, his torments, his loves and his hatreds all lay in the past and only oblivion lay before him. As
the last of his breath left his body, he gave himself wholly to the sea; to Straasha, Lord of all the Water
Elementals, once the comrade of the Melnibonean folk. And as he did this he remembered the old spell
which his ancestors had used to summon Straasha. The spell came unbidden into his dying brain.

 Waters of the sea, thou gave us birth
 And were our milk and mother both
 In days when skies were overcast
 You who were first shall be the last.

 Sea-rulers, fathers of our blood,
 Thine aid is sought, thine aid is sought,
 Your salt is blood, our blood your salt,
 Your blood the blood of Man.

 Straasha, eternal king, eternal sea
 Thine aid is sought by me;
 For enemies of thine and mine
 Seek to defeat our destiny, and drain
 away our sea.

 Either the words had an old, symbolic meaning or they referred to some incident in Melnibonean
history which even Elric had not read about. The words meant very little to him and yet they continued
to repeat themselves as his body sank deeper and deeper into the green waters. Even when blackness
overwhelmed him and his lungs filled with water, the words continued to whisper through the corridors
of his brain. It was strange that he should be dead and still hear the incantation.

 It seemed a long while later that his eyes opened and revealed swirling water and, through it, huge,
indistinct figures gliding towards him. Death, it appeared, took a long time to come and, while he died,
he dreamed. The leading figure had a turquoise beard and hair, pale green skin that seemed made of the
sea itself and, when he spoke, a voice that was like a rushing tide. He smiled at Elric.
 Straasha answers thy summons, mortal. Our destinies are bound together. How may I aid thee, and,
in aiding thee, aid myself?
 Elric's mouth was filled with water and yet he still seemed capable of speech (thus proving he
dreamed).
 He said:
 'King Straasha. The paintings in the Tower of D'a'rputna--in the library. When I was a boy I saw
them, King Straasha.'
 The sea-king stretched out his sea-green hands. 'Aye. You sent the summons. You need our aid. We
honour our ancient pact with your folk.'
 'No. I did not mean to summon you. The summons came unbidden to my dying mind. I am happy to
drown, King Straasha.'
 'That cannot be. If your mind summoned us it means you wish to live. We will aid you.' King
Straasha's beard streamed in the tide and his deep, green eyes were gentle, almost tender, as they
regarded the albino.
 Elric closed his own eyes again. 'I dream,' he said. 'I deceive myself with fantasies of hope.' He felt
the water in his lungs and he knew he no longer breathed. It stood to reason, therefore, that he was dead.
'But if you were real, old friend, and you wished to aid me, you would return me to Melnibone so that I 
might deal with the usurper, Yyrkoon, and save Cymoril, before it is too late. That is my only regret--the
torment which Cymoril will suffer if her brother becomes Emperor of Melnibone.'
 'Is that all you ask of the water elementals?' King Straasha seemed almost disappointed.
 'I do not even ask that of you. I only voice what I would have wished, had this been reality and I
was speaking, which I know is impossible. Now I shall die.'
 'That cannot be, Lord Elric, for our destinies are truly intertwined and I know that it is not yet your
destiny to perish. Therefore I will aid you as you have suggested.'
 Elric was surprised at the sharpness of detail of this fantasy. He said to himself. 'What a cruel
torment I subject myself to. Now I must set about admitting my death...'
 'You cannot die. Not yet.'
 Now it was as if the sea-king's gentle hands had picked him up and bore him through twisting
corridors of a delicate coral pink texture, slightly shadowed, no longer in water. And Elric felt the water
vanish from his lungs and stomach and he breathed. Could it be that he had actually been brought to the
legendary plane of the elemental folk--a plane which intersected that of the earth and in which they
dwelled, for the most part?
 In a huge, circular cavern, which shone with pink and blue mother-of-pearl, they came to rest at
last. The sea-king laid Elric down upon the floor of the cavern, which seemed to be covered with fine,
white sand which was yet not sand for it yielded and then sprang back when he moved.
 When King Straasha moved, it was with a sound like the tide drawing itself back over shingle. The
sea-king crossed the white sand, walking towards a large throne of milky jade. He seated himself upon
this throne and placed his green head on his green fist, regarding Elric with puzzled, yet compassionate
eyes.
 Elric was still physically weak, but he could breathe. It was as if the sea water had filled him and
then cleansed him when it was driven out. He felt clear-headed. And now he was much less sure that he
dreamed.
 'I still find it hard to know why you saved me, King Straasha,' he murmured from where he lay on
the sand.
 'The rune. We heard it on this plane and we came. That is all.'
 'Aye. But there is more to sorcery-working than that. There are chants, symbols, rituals of all sorts.
Previously that has always been true.'
 'Perhaps the rituals take the place of urgent need of the kind which sent out your summons to us.
Though you say you wished to die, it was evident you did not really want to die or the summoning would
not have been so clear and have reached us so swiftly. Forget all this now. When you have rested, we
shall do what you have requested of us.'
 Painfully, Elric raised himself into a sitting position. 'You spoke earlier of "intertwined destinies".
Do you, then, know something of my destiny?'
 'A little, I think. Our world grows old. Once the elementals were powerful on your plane and the
people of Melnibone all shared that power. But now our power wanes, as does yours. Something is
changing. There are intimations that the Lords of the Higher Worlds are again taking an interest in your
world. Perhaps they fear that the folk of the Young Kingdoms have forgotten them. Perhaps the folk of
the Young Kingdoms threaten to bring in a new age, where gods and beings such as myself no longer
shall have a place. I suspect there is a certain unease upon the planes of the Higher Worlds.'
 'You know no more?'
 King Straasha raised his head and looked directly into Elric's eyes. 'There is no more I can tell you,
son of my old friends, save that you would be happier if you gave yourself up entirely to your destiny
when you understand it.'
 Elric sighed. 'I think I know of what you speak, King Straasha. I shall try to follow your advice.'
 'And now that you have rested, it is time to return.'
 The sea-king rose from his throne of milky jade and flowed towards Elric, lifting him up in strong, 
green arms.
 'We shall meet again before your life ends, Elric. I hope that I shall be able to aid you once more.
And remember that our brothers of the air and of fire will try to aid you also. And remember the beasts--
they, too, can be of service to you. There is no need to suspect their help. But beware of gods, Elric.
Beware of the Lords of the Higher Worlds and remember that their aid and their gifts must always be
paid for.'
 These were the last words Elric heard the sea-king speak before they rushed again through the
sinuous tunnels of this other plane, moving at such a speed that Elric could distinguish no details and, at
times, did not know whether they remained in King Straasha's kingdom or had returned to the depths of
his own world's sea.


2

A New Emperor and an Emperor
Renewed

 STRANGE CLOUDS FILLED the sky and the sun hung heavy and huge and red behind them and
the ocean was black as the golden galleys swept homeward before their battered flagship The Son of the
Pyaray which moved slowly with dead slaves at her oars and her tattered sails limp at their masts and
smoke-begrimed men on her decks and a new emperor upon her war-wrecked bridge. The new emperor
was the only jubilant man in the fleet and he was jubilant indeed. It was his banner now, not Elric's,
which took pride of place on the flagmast, for he had lost no time in proclaiming Elric slain and himself
ruler of Melnibone.
 To Yyrkoon, the peculiar sky was an omen of change, of a return to the old ways and the old power
of the Dragon Isle. When he issued orders, his voice was a veritable croon of pleasure, and Admiral
Magum Colim, who had ever been wary of Elric but who now had to obey Yyrkoon's orders, wondered
if, perhaps, it would not have been preferable to have dealt with Yyrkoon in the manner in which (he
suspected) Yyrkoon had dealt with Elric.
 Dyvim Tvar leaned on the rail of his own ship,
 Terhali's Particular Satisfaction, and he also paid attention to the sky, though he saw omens of
doom, for he mourned for Elric and considered how he might take vengeance on Prince Yyrkoon; should
it emerge that Yyrkoon had murdered his cousin for possession of the Ruby Throne.
 Melnibone appeared on the horizon, a brooding silhouette of crags, a dark monster squatting in the
sea, calling her own back to the heated pleasures of her womb, the Dreaming City of Imrryr. The great
cliffs loomed, the central gate to the sea-maze opened, water slapped and gasped as the golden prows
disturbed it and the golden ships were swallowed into the murky dankness of the tunnels where bits of
wreckage still floated from the previous night's encounter; where white, bloated corpses could still be
Seen when the brandlight touch them. The prows nosed arrogantly through the remains of their prey, but
there was no joy aboard the golden battle-barges, for they brought news of their old emperor's death in
battle (Yyrkoon had told them what had happened). Next night and for seven nights in all the Wild
Dance of Melnibone would fill the streets. Potions and petty spells would ensure that no one slept, for
sleep was forbidden to any Melnibonean, old or young, while a dead emperor was mourned. Naked, the
Dragon Princes would prowl the city, taking any young woman they found and filling her with their seed
for it was traditional that if an emperor died then the nobles of Melnibone must create as many children
of aristocratic blood as was possible. Music-slaves would howl from the top of every tower. Other slaves
would be slain and some eaten. It was a dreadful dance, the Dance of Misery, and it took as many lives
as it created. A tower would be pulled down and a new one erected during those seven days and the
tower would be called for Elric VIII, the Albino Emperor, slain upon the sea, defending Melnibone 
against the southland pirates.
 Slain upon the sea and his body taken by the waves. That was not a good portent, for it meant that
Elric had gone to serve Pyaray, the Tentacled Whisperer of Impossible Secrets, the Chaos Lord who
commanded the Chaos Fleet--dead ships, dead sailors, forever in his thrall--and it was not fitting that
such a fate should befall one of the Royal Line of Melnibone. Ah, but the mourning would be long,
thought Dyvim Tvar. He had loved Elric, for all that he had sometimes disapproved of his methods of
ruling the Dragon Isle. Secretly he would go to the Dragon Caves that night and spend the period of
mourning with the sleeping dragons who, now that Elric was dead, were all he had left to love. And
Dyvim Tvar then thought of Cymoril, awaiting Elric's return.
 The ships began to emerge into the half-light of the evening. Torches and braziers already burned
on the quays of Imrryr which were deserted save for a small group of figures who stood around a chariot
which had been driven out to the end of the central mole. A cold wind blew. Dyvim Tvar knew that it
was the Princess Cymoril who waited, with her guards, for the fleet.
 Though the flagship was the last to pass through the maze, the rest of the ships had to wait until it
could be towed into position and dock first. If this had not been the required tradition, Dyvim Tvar
would have left his ship and gone to speak to Cymoril, escort her from the quay and tell her what he
knew of the circumstances of Elric's death. But it was impossible. Even before Terhali's Particular
Satisfaction had dropped anchor, the main gangplank of The Son of the Pyaray had been lowered and the
Emperor Yyrkoon, all swaggering pride, had stepped down it, his arms raised in triumphant salute to his
sister who could be seen, even now, searching the decks of the ships for a sign of her beloved albino.
 Suddenly Cymoril knew that Elric was dead and she suspected that Yyrkoon had, in some way,
been responsible for Elric's death. Either Yyrkoon had allowed Elric to be borne down by a group of
southland reavers or else he had managed to slay Elric himself. She knew her brother and she recognised
his expression. He was pleased with himself as he always had been when successful in some form of
treachery or another. Anger flashed in her tear-filled eyes and she threw back her head and shouted at the
shifting, ominous sky:
 'Oh! Yyrkoon has destroyed him!'
 Her guards were startled. The captain spoke solicitously. 'Madam?'
 'He is dead--and that brother slew him. Take Prince Yyrkoon, captain. Kill Prince Yyrkoon,
captain.'
 Unhappily, the captain put his right hand on the hilt of his sword. A young warrior, more
impetuous, drew his blade, murmuring: 'I will slay him, princess, if that is your desire.' The young
warrior loved Cymoril with considerable and unthinking intensity.
 The captain offered the warrior a cautionary glance, but the warrior was blind to it. Now two others
slid swords from scabbards as Yyrkoon, a red cloak wound about him, his dragon crest catching the light
from the brands guttering in the wind, stalked forward and cried:
 'Yyrkoon is emperor now!'
 'No!' shrieked Yyrkoon's sister. 'Elric! Elric! Where are you?'
 'Serving his new master, Pyaray of Chaos. His dead hands pull at the sweep of a Chaos ship, sister.
His dead eyes see nothing at all. His dead ears hear only the crack of Pyaray's whips and his dead flesh
cringes, feeling nought but that unearthly scourge. Elric sank in his armour to the bottom of the sea.'
 'Murderer! Traitor!' Cymoril began to sob.
 The captain, who was a practical man, said to his warriors in a low voice: 'Sheath your weapons and
salute your new emperor.'
 Only the young guardsman who loved Cymoril disobeyed. 'But he slew the emperor! My lady
Cymoril said so!'
 'What of it? He is emperor now. Kneel or you'll be dead within the minute.'
 The young warrior gave a wild shout and leapt towards Yyrkoon, who stepped back, trying to free
his arms from the folds of his cloak. He had not expected this.
 But it was the captain who leapt forward, his own sword drawn; and hacked down the youngster so
that he gasped, half-turned, then fell at Yyrkoon's feet.
 This demonstration of the captain's was confirmation of his real power and Yyrkoon almost smirked
with satisfaction as he looked down at the corpse. The captain fell to one knee, the bloody sword still in
his hand. 'My emperor,' he said.
 'You show a proper loyalty, captain.'
 'My loyalty is to the Ruby Throne.'
 'Quite so.'
 Cymoril shook with grief and rage, but her rage was impotent. She knew now that she had no
friends.
 Leering, the Emperor Yyrkoon presented himself before her. He reached out his hand and he
caressed her neck, her cheek, her mouth. He let his hand fall so that it grazed her breast. 'Sister,' he said,
'thou art mine entirely now.'
 And Cymoril was the second to fall at his feet, for she had fainted.
 'Pick her up,' Yyrkoon said to the guard. 'Take her back to her own tower and there be sure she
remains. Two guards will be with her at all times, in even her most private moments they must observe
her, for she may plan treachery against the Ruby Throne.'
 The captain bowed and signed to his men to obey the emperor. 'Aye, my lord. It shall be done.'
 Yyrkoon looked back at the corpse of the young warrior. 'And feed that to her slaves tonight, so that
he can continue serving her.' He smiled.
 The captain smiled, too, appreciating the joke. He felt it was good to have a proper emperor in
Melnibone again. An emperor who knew how to behave, who knew how to treat his enemies and who
accepted unswerving loyalty as his right. The captain fancied that fine, martial times lay ahead for
Melnibone. The golden battle-barges and the warriors of Imrryr could go a-spoiling again and instil in
the barbarians of the Young Kingdoms a sweet and satisfactory sense of fear. Already, in his mind, the
captain helped himself to the treasures of Lormyr, Argimiliar and Pikarayd, of Ilmiora and Jadmar. He
might even be made governor, say, of the Isle of the Purple Towns. What luxuries of torment would he
bring to those upstart sealords, particularly Count Smiorgan Baldhead who was even now beginning to
try to make the isle a rival to Melnibone as a trading port. As he escorted the limp body of the Princess
Cymoril back to her tower, the captain looked on that body and felt the swellings of lust within him.
Yyrkoon would reward his loyalty, there was no doubt of that. Despite the cold wind, the captain began
to sweat in his anticipation. He, himself, would guard the Princess Cymoril. He would relish it.

 Marching at the head of his army, Yyrkoon strutted for the Tower of D'arputna, the Tower of
Emperors, and the Ruby Throne within. He preferred to ignore the litter which had been brought for him
and to go on foot, so that he might savour every small moment of his triumph. He approached the tower,
tall among its fellows at the very centre of Imrryr, as he might approach a beloved woman. He
approached it with a sense of delicacy and without haste, for he knew that it was his.
 He looked about him. His army marched behind him. Magum Colim and Dyvim Tvar led the army.
People lined the twisting streets and bowed low to him. Slaves prostrated themselves. Even the beasts of
burden were made to kneel as he strode by. Yyrkoon could almost taste the power as one might taste a
luscious fruit. He drew deep breaths of the air. Even the air was his. All Imrryr was his. All Melnibone,
Soon would all the world be his. And he would squander it all. How he would squander it! Such a grand
terror would he bring back to the earth; such a munificence of fear! In ecstasy, almost blindly, did the
Emperor Yyrkoon enter the tower. He hesitated at the great doors of the throne room. He signed for the
doors to be opened and as they opened he deliberately took in the scene tiny bit by tiny bit. The walls,
the banners, the trophies, the galleries, all were his. The throne room was empty now, but soon he would
fill it with colour and celebration and true, Melnibonean entertainments. It had been too long since blood
had sweetened the air of this hall. Now he let his eyes linger upon the steps leading up to the Ruby 
Throne itself, but, before he looked at the throne, he heard Dyvim Tvar gasp behind him and his gaze
went suddenly to the Ruby Throne and his jaw slackened at what he saw. His eyes widened in
incredulity.
 'An illusion!'
 'An apparition, ' said Dyvim Tvar with some satisfaction.
 'Heresy!' cried the Emperor Yyrkoon, staggering forward, finger pointing at the robed and cowled
figure which sat so still upon the Ruby Throne. 'Mine! Mine!'
 The figure made no reply.
 'Mine! Begone! The throne belongs to Yyrkoon. Yyrkoon is emperor now! What are you? Why
would you thwart me thus?'
 The cowl fell back and a bone-white face was revealed, surrounded by flowing, milk-white hair.
Crimson eyes looked coolly down at the shrieking, stumbling thing which came towards them.
 'You are dead, Elric! I know that you are dead!'
 The apparition made no reply, but a thin smile touched the white lips.
 'You could not have survived. You drowned. You cannot come back. Pyaray owns your soul!'
 'There are others who rule in the sea, 'said the figure on the Ruby Throne. 'Why did you slay me,
cousin?'
 Yyrkoon's guile had deserted him, making way for terror and confusion. 'Because it is my right to
rule! Because you were not strong enough, nor cruel enough, nor humorous enough...'
 'Is this not a good joke, cousin?'
 'Begone! Begone! Begone! I shall not be ousted by a spectre! A dead emperor cannot rule
Melnibone!'
 'We shall see,' said Elric, signing to Dyvim Tvar and his soldiers.


3

A Traditional Justice

 'NOW INDEED I shall rule as you would have had me rule, cousin.' Elric watched as Dyvim Tvar's
soldiers surrounded the would-be usurper and seized his arms, relieving him of his weapons.
 Yyrkoon panted like a captured wolf. He glared around him as if hoping to find support from the
assembled warriors, but they stared back at him either neutrally or with open contempt.
 'And you, Prince Yyrkoon, will be the first to benefit from this new rule of mine. Are you pleased?'
 Yyrkoon lowered his head. He was trembling now. Elric laughed, 'Speak up, cousin.'
 'May Arioch and all the Dukes of Hell torment you for eternity,' growled Yyrkoon. He flung back
his head, his wild eyes rolling, his lips curling: 'Arioch! Arioch! Curse this feeble albino! Arioch!
Destroy him or see Melnibone fall!'
 Elric continued to laugh. 'Arioch does not hear you. Chaos is weak upon the earth now. It needs a
greater sorcery than yours to bring the Chaos Lords back to aid you as they aided our ancestors. And
now, Yyrkoon, tell me--where is the Lady Cymoril?'
 But Yyrkoon had lapsed, again, into a sullen silence.
 'She is at her own tower, my emperor,' said Magum Colim.
 'A creature of Yyrkoon's took her there,' said Dyvim Tvar. 'The captain of Cymoril's own guard, he
slew a warrior who tried to defend his mistress against Yyrkoon. It could be that Princess Cymoril is in
danger, my lord.'
 'Then go quickly to the tower. Take a force of men. Bring both Cymoril and the captain of her guard
to me.'
 'And Yyrkoon, my lord?' asked Dyvim Tvar. 
 'Let him remain here until his sister returns.'
 Dyvim Tvar bowed and, selecting a body of warriors, left the throne room. All noticed that Dyvim
Tvar's step was lighter and his expression less grim than when he had first approached the throne room at
Prince Yyrkoon's back.
 Yyrkoon straightened his head and looked about the court. For a moment he seemed like a pathetic
and bewildered child. All the lines of hate and anger had disappeared and Elric felt sympathy for his
cousin growing again within him. But this time Elric quelled the feeling.
 'Be grateful, cousin, that for a few hours you were totally powerful, that you enjoyed domination
over all the folk of Melnibone.'
 Yyrkoon said in a small, puzzled voice: 'How did you escape? You had no time for making a
sorcery, no strength for it. You could barely move your limbs and your armour must have dragged you
deep to the bottom of the sea so that you should have drowned. It is unfair, Elric. You should have
drowned.'
 Elric shrugged, 'I have friends in the sea. They recognise my royal blood and my right to rule if you
do not.'
 Yyrkoon tried to disguise the astonishment he felt. Evidently his respect for Elric had increased, as
had his hatred for the albino emperor. 'Friends.'
 'Aye,' said Elric with a thin grin.
 'I--I thought, too, you had vowed not to use your powers of sorcery.'
 'But you thought that a vow which was unbefitting for a Melnibonean monarch to make, did you
not? Well, I agree with you. You see, Yyrkoon, you have won a victory, after all.'
 Yyrkoon stared narrowly at Elric, as if trying to divine a secret meaning behind Elric's words. 'You
will bring back the Chaos Lords?'
 'No sorcerer, however powerful, can summon the Chaos Lords or, for that matter, the Lords of Law,
if they do not wish to be summoned. That you know. You must know it, Yyrkoon. Have you not,
yourself, tried. And Arioch did not come, did he? Did he bring you the gift you sought--the gift of the
two black swords?'
 'You know that?'
 'I did not. I guessed. Now I know.'
 Yyrkoon tried to speak but his voice would not form words, so angry was he. Instead, a strangled
growl escaped his throat and for a few moments he struggled in the grip of his guards.

 Dyvim Tvar returned with Cymoril. The girl was pale but she was smiling. She ran into the throne
room. 'Elric!'
 'Cymoril! Are you harmed?'
 Cymoril glanced at the crestfallen captain of her guard who had been brought with her. A look of
disgust crossed her fine face. Then she shook her head. 'No. I am not harmed.'
 The captain of Cymoril's guard was shaking with terror. He looked pleadingly at Yyrkoon as if
hoping that his fellow prisoner could help him. But Yyrkoon continued to stare at the floor.
 'Have that one brought closer.' Elric pointed at the captain of the guard. The man was dragged to the
foot of the steps leading to the Ruby Throne. He moaned. 'What a petty traitor you are,' said Elric. 'At
least Yyrkoon had the courage to attempt to slay me. And his ambitions were high. Your ambition was
merely to become one of his pet curs. So you betrayed your mistress and slew one of your own men.
What is your name?'
 The man had difficulty speaking, but at last he murmured, 'It is Valharik, my name. What could I
do? I serve the Ruby Throne, whoever sits upon it.'
 'So the traitor claims that loyalty motivated him. I think not.'
 'It was, my lord. It was.' The captain began to whine. He fell to his knees. 'Slay me swiftly. Do not
punish me more.'
 Elric's impulse was to heed the man's request, but he looked at Yyrkoon and then remembered the
expression on Cymoril's face when she had looked at the guard. He knew that he must make a point now,
whilst making an example of Captain Valharik. So he shook his head. 'No. I will punish you more.
Tonight you will die here according to the traditions of Melnibone, while my nobles feast to celebrate
this new era of my rule.'
 Valharik began to sob. Then he stopped himself and got slowly to his feet, a Melnibonean again. He
bowed low and stepped backward, giving himself into the grip of his guards.
 'I must consider a way in which your fate may be shared with the one you wished to serve,' Elric
went on. 'How did you slay the young warrior who sought to obey Cymoril?'
 'With my sword. I cut him down. It was a clean stroke. But one.'
 'And what became of the corpse.'
 'Prince Yyrkoon told me to feed it to Princess Cymoril's slaves.'
 'I understand. Very well, Prince Yyrkoon, you may join us at the feast tonight while Captain
Valharik entertains us with his dying.'
 Yyrkoon's face was almost as pale as Elric's. 'What do you mean?'
 'The little pieces of Captain Valharik's flesh which our Doctor Jest will carve from his limbs will be
the meat on which you feast. You may give instructions as to how you wish the captain's flesh prepared.
We should not expect you to eat it raw, cousin.'
 Even Dyvim Tvar looked astonished at Elric's decision. Certainly it was in the spirit of Melnibone
and a clever irony improving on Prince Yyrkoon's own idea, but it was unlike Elric-- or, at least, it was
unlike the Elric he had known up until a day earlier.
 As he heard his fate, Captain Valharik gave a great scream of terror and glared at Prince Yyrkoon as
if the would-be usurper were already tasting his flesh. Yyrkoon tried to turn away, his shoulders shaking.
 'And that will be the beginning of it,' said Elric. 'The feast will start at midnight. Until that time,
confine Yyrkoon to his own tower.'

 After Prince Yyrkoon and Captain Valharik had been led away, Dyvim Tvar and Princess Cymoril
came and stood beside Elric who had sunk back in his great throne and was staring bitterly into the
middle-distance.
 'That was a clever cruelty,' Dyvim Tvar said. Cymoril said: 'It is what they both deserve.'
 'Aye,' murmured Elric. 'It is what my father would have done. It is what Yyrkoon would have done
had our positions been reversed. I but follow the traditions. I no longer pretend that I am my own man.
Here I shall stay until I die, trapped upon the Ruby Throne--serving the Ruby Throne as Valharik
claimed to serve it,'
 'Could you not kill them both quickly?' Cymoril asked. 'You know that I do not plead for my
brother because he is my brother. I hate him most of all. But it might destroy you, Elric, to follow
through with your plan.'
 'What if it does? Let me be destroyed. Let me merely become an unthinking extension of my
ancestors. The puppet of ghosts and memories, dancing to strings which extend back through time for ten
thousand years.'
 'Perhaps if you slept...' Dyvim Tvar suggested.
 'I shall not sleep, I feel, for many nights after this. But your brother is not going to die, Cymoril.
After his punishment--after he has eaten the flesh of Captain Valharik--I intend to send him into exile.
He will go alone into the Young Kingdoms and he will not be allowed to take his grimoires with him. He
must make his way as best he can in the lands of the barbarian. That is not too severe a punishment, I
think.'
 'It is too lenient,' said Cymoril. 'You would be best advised to slay him. Send soldiers now. Give
him no time to consider counterplots.'
 'I do not fear his counterplots.' Elric rose wearily. 'Now I should like it if you would both leave me, 
until an hour or so before the feasting begins. I must think.'
 'I will return to my tower and prepare myself for tonight,' said Cymoril. She kissed Elric lightly
upon his pale forehead. He looked up, filled with love and tenderness for her. He reached out and
touched her hair and her cheek. 'Remember that I love you, Elric,' she said.
 'I will see that you are safely escorted homeward,' Dyvim Tvar said to her. 'And you must choose a
new commander of your guard. Can I assist in that?'
 'I should be grateful, Dyvim Tvar.'
 They left Elric still upon the Ruby Throne, still staring into space. The hand that he lifted from time
to time to his pale head shook a little and now the torment showed in his strange, crimson eyes.
 Later, he rose up from the Ruby Throne and walked slowly, head bowed, to his own apartments,
followed by his guards. He hesitated at the door which led onto the steps going up to the library.
Instinctively he sought the consolation and forgetfulness of a certain kind of knowledge, but at that
moment he suddenly hated his scrolls and his books. He blamed them for his ridiculous concerns
regarding 'morality' and 'justice'; he blamed them for the feelings of guilt and despair which now filled
him as a result of his decision to behave as a Melnibonean monarch was expected to behave. So he
passed the door to the library and went on to his apartments, but even his apartments displeased him
now. They were austere. They were not furnished according to the luxurious tastes of all Melniboneans
(save for his father) with their delight in lush mixtures of colour and bizarre design. He would have them
changed as soon as possible. He would give himself up to those ghosts who ruled him. For some time he
stalked from room to room, trying to push back that part of him which demanded he be merciful to
Valharik and to Yyrkoon--at very least to slay them and be done with it or, better, to send them both into
exile. But it was impossible to reverse his decision now.
 At last he lowered himself to a couch which rested beside a window looking out over the whole of
the city. The sky was still full of turbulent cloud, but now the moon shone through, like the yellow eye of
an unhealthy beast. It seemed to stare with a certain triumphant irony at him, as if relishing the defeat of
his conscience. Elric sank his head into his arms.
 Later the servants came to tell him that the courtiers were assembling for the celebration feast. He
allowed them to dress him in his yellow robes of state and to place the dragon crown upon his head and
then he returned to the throne room to be greeted by a mighty cheer, more wholehearted than any he had
ever received before. He acknowledged the greeting and then seated himself in the Ruby Throne, looking
out over the banqueting tables which now filled the hall. A table was brought and set before him and two
extra seats were brought, for Dyvim Tvar and Cymoril would sit beside him. But Dyvim Tvar and
Cymoril were not yet here and neither had the renegade Valharik been brought. And where was
Yyrkoon? They should, even now, be at the centre of the hall--Valharik in chains and Yyrkoon seated
beneath him. Doctor Jest was there, heating his brazier on which rested his cooking pans, testing and
sharpening his knives. The hall was filled with excited talk as the court waited to be entertained. Already
the food was being brought in, though no one might eat until the emperor ate first.
 Elric signed to the commander of his own guard. 'Has the Princess Cymoril or Lord Dyvim Tvar
arrived at the tower yet?'
 'No, my lord.'
 Cymoril was rarely late and Dyvim Tvar never. Elric frowned. Perhaps they did not relish the
entertainment.
 'And what of the prisoners?'
 'They have been sent for, my lord.'
 Doctor Jest looked up expectantly, his thin body tensed in anticipation.
 And then Elric heard a sound above the din of the conversation. A groaning sound which seemed to
come from all around the tower. He bent his head and listened closely.
 Others were hearing it now. They stopped talking and also listened intently. Soon the whole hall
was in silence and the groaning increased.
 Then, all at once, the doors of the throne room burst open and there was Dyvim Tvar, gasping and
bloody, his clothes slashed and his flesh gashed. And following him in came a mist--a swirling mist of
dark purples and unpleasant blues and it was this mist that groaned.
 Elric sprang from his throne and knocked the table aside. He leapt down the steps towards his
friend. The groaning mist began to creep further into the throne room, as if reaching out for Dyvim Tvar.
 Elric took his friend in his arms. 'Dyvim Tvar! What is this sorcery?'
 Dyvim Tvar's face was full of horror and his lips seemed frozen until at last he said:
 'It is Yyrkoon's sorcery. He conjured the groaning mist to aid him in his escape. I tried to follow
him from the city but the mist engulfed me and I lost my senses. I went to his tower to bring him and his
accessory here, but the sorcery had already been accomplished.'
 'Cymoril? Where is she?'
 'He took her, Elric. She is with him. Valharik is with him and so are a hundred warriors who
remained secretly loyal to him.'
 'Then we must pursue him. We shall soon capture him.'
 'You can do nothing against the groaning mist. Ah! It comes!'
 And sure enough the mist was beginning to surround them. Elric tried to disperse it by waving his
arms, but then it had gathered thickly around him and its melancholy groaning filled his ears, its hideous
colours blinded his eyes. He tried to rush through it, but it remained with him. And now he thought he
heard words amongst the groans. 'Elric is weak. Elric is foolish. Elric must die!'
 'Stop this!' he cried. He bumped into another body and fell to his knees. He began to crawl,
desperately trying to peer through the mist. Now faces formed in the mist--frightful faces, more
terrifying than any he had ever seen, even in his worst nightmares.
 'Cymoril!' he cried. 'Cymoril!'
 And one of the faces became the face of Cymoril--a Cymoril who leered at him and mocked him
and whose face slowly aged until he saw a filthy crone and, ultimately, a skull on which the flesh rotted.
He closed his eyes, but the image remained.
 'Cymoril,' whispered the voices. 'Cymoril,'
 And Elric grew weaker as he became more desperate. He cried out for Dyvim Tvar, but heard only
a mocking echo of the name, as he had heard Cymoril's. He shut his lips and he shut his eyes and, still
crawling, tried to free himself from the groaning mist. But hours seemed to pass before the groans
became whines and the whines became faint strands of sound and he tried to rise, opening his eyes to see
the mist fading, but then his legs buckled and he fell down against the first step which led to the Ruby
Throne. Again he had ignored Cymoril's advice concerning her brother--and again she was in danger.
Elric's last thought was a simple one:
 'I am not fit to live,' he thought.


4

To Call the Chaos Lord

 AS SOON AS he recovered from the blow which had knocked him unconscious and thus wasted
even more time, Elric sent for Dyvim Tvar. He was eager for news. But Dyvim Tvar could report
nothing. Yyrkoon had summoned sorcerous aid to free him, sorcerous aid to effect his escape. 'He must
have had some magical means of leaving the island, for he could not have gone by ship,' said Dyvim
Tvar.
 'You must send out expeditions,' said Elric. 'Send a thousand detachments if you must. Send every
man in Melnibone. Strive to wake the dragons that they might be used. Equip the golden battle-barges.
Cover the world with our men if you must, but find Cymoril.'
 'All those things I have already done,' said Dyvim Tvar, 'save that I have not yet found Cymoril.'
 A month passed and Imrryrian warriors marched and rode through the Young Kingdoms seeking
news of their renegade countrymen.
 'I worried more for myself than for Cymoril and I called that "morality",' thought the albino. 'I
tested my sensibilities, not my conscience.'
 A second month passed and Imrryrian dragons sailed the skies to South and East, West and North,
but though they flew across mountains, and seas, and forests and plains and, unwittingly, brought terror
to many a city, they found no sign of Yyrkoon and his band.
 'For, finally, one can only judge oneself by one's actions,' thought Elric. 'I have looked at what I
have done, not at what I meant to do or thought I would like to do, and what I have done has, in the
main, been foolish, destructive and with little point. Yyrkoon was right to despise me and that was why I
hated him so.'
 A fourth month came and Imrryrian ships stopped in remote ports and Imrryrian sailors questioned
other travelers and explorers for news of Yyrkoon. But Yyrkoon's sorcery had been strong and none had
seen him (or remembered seeing him).
 'I must now consider the implications of all these thoughts,' said Elric to himself.
 Wearily, the swiftest of the soldiers began to return to Melnibone, bearing their useless news. And
as faith disappeared and hope faded, Elric's determination increased. He made himself strong, both
physically and mentally. He experimented with new drugs which would increase his energy rather than
replenish the energy he did not share with other men. He read much in the library, though this time he
read only certain grimoires and he read those over and over again.
 These grimoires were written in the High Speech of Melnibone--the ancient language of sorcery
with which Elric's ancestors had been able to communicate with the supernatural beings they had
summoned. And at last Elric was satisfied that he understood them fully, though what he read sometimes
threatened to stop him in his present course of action.
 And when he was satisfied--for the dangers of misunderstanding the implications of the things
described in the grimoires were catastrophic--he slept for three nights in a drugged slumber.
 And then Elric was ready. He ordered all slaves and servants from his quarters. He placed guards at
the doors with instructions to admit no one, no matter how urgent their business. He cleared one great
chamber of all furniture so that it was completely empty save for one grimoire which he had placed in
the very centre of the room. Then he seated himself beside the book and began to think.
 When he had meditated for more than five hours Elric took a brush and a jar of ink and began to
paint both walls and floor with complicated symbols, some of which were so intricate, that they seemed
to disappear at an angle to the surface on which they had been laid. At last this was done and Elric
spreadeagled himself in the very centre of his huge rune, face down, one hand upon his grimoire, the
other (with the Actorios upon it) stretched palm down. The moon was full. A shaft of its light fell
directly upon Elric's head, turning the hair to silver. And then the Summoning began.
 Elric sent his mind into twisting tunnels of logic, across endless plains of ideas, through mountains
of symbolism and endless universes of alternate truths; he sent his mind out further and further and as it
went he sent with it the words which issued from his writhing lips--words that few of his contemporaries
would understand, though their very sound would chill the blood of any listener. And his body heaved as
he forced it to remain in its original position and from time to time a groan would escape him. And
through all this a few words came again and again.
 One of these words was a name. 'Arioch'.
 Arioch, the patron demon of Elric's ancestors; one of the most powerful of all the Dukes of Hell,
who was called Knight of the Swords, Lord of the Seven Darks, Lord of the Higher Hell and many more
names besides.
 'Arioch!'
 It was on Arioch whom Yyrkoon had called, asking the Lord of Chaos to curse Elric. It was Arioch 
whom Yyrkoon had sought to summon to aid him in his attempt upon the Ruby Throne. It was Arioch
who was known as the Keeper of the Two Black Swords--the swords of unearthly manufacture and
infinite power which had once been wielded by emperors of Melnibone.
 'Arioch! I summon thee.'
 Runes, both rhythmic and fragmented, howled now from Elric's throat. His brain had reached the
plane on which Arioch dwelt. Now it sought Arioch himself.
 'Arioch! It is Elric of Melnibone who summons thee.'
 Elric glimpsed an eye staring down at him. The eye floated, joined another. The two eyes regarded
him.
 'Arioch! My Lord of Chaos! Aid me!'
 The eyes blinked--and vanished.
 'Oh, Arioch! Come to me! Come to me! Aid me and I will serve you!'
 A silhouette that was not a human form, turned slowly until a black, faceless head looked down
upon Elric. A halo of red light gleamed behind the head.
 Then that, too, vanished.
 Exhausted, Elric let the image fade. His mind raced back through plane upon plane. His lips no
longer chanted the runes and the names. He lay exhausted upon the floor of his chamber, unable to
move, in silence.
 He was certain that he had failed.
 There was a small sound. Painfully he raised his weary head.
 A fly had come into the chamber. It buzzed about erratically, seeming almost to follow the lines of
the runes Elric had so recently painted.
 The fly settled first upon one rune and then on another.
 It must have come in through the window, thought Elric. He was annoyed by the distraction but still
fascinated by it.
 The fly settled on Elric's forehead. It was a large, black fly and its buzz was loud, obscene. It rubbed
its forelegs together, and it seemed to be taking a particular interest in Elric's face as it moved over it.
Elric shuddered, but he did not have the strength to swat it. When it came into his field of vision, he
watched it. When it was not visible he felt its legs covering every inch of his face. Then it flew up and,
still buzzing loudly, hovered a short distance from Elric's nose. And then Elric could see the fly's eyes
and recognise something in them. They were the eyes--and yet not the eyes--he had seen on that other
plane.
 It began to dawn on him that this fly was no ordinary creature. It had features that were in some
way faintly human.
 The fly smiled at him.
 From his hoarse throat and through his parched lips Elric was able to utter but one word.: 'Arioch?'
 And a beautiful youth stood where the fly had hovered. The beautiful youth spoke in a beautiful
voice--soft and sympathetic and yet manly. He was clad in a robe that was like a liquid jewel and yet
which did not dazzle Elric, for in some way no light seemed to come from it. There was a slender sword
at the youth's belt and he wore no helm, but a circlet of red fire. His eyes were wise and his eyes were
old and when they were looked at closely they could be seen to contain an ancient and confident evil.
 'Elric.'
 That was all the youth said, but it revived the albino so that he could raise himself to his knees.
 'Elric.'
 And Elric could stand. He was filled with energy.
 The youth was taller, now, than Elric. He looked down at the Emperor of Melnibone and he smiled
the smile that the fly had smiled. 'You alone are fit to serve Arioch. It is long since I was invited to this
plane, but now that I am here I shall aid you, Elric. I shall become your patron. I shall protect you and
give you strength and the source of strength, though master I be and slave you be.'
 'How must I serve you, Duke Arioch?' Elric asked, having made a monstrous effort of self-control,
for he was filled with terror by the implications of Arioch's words.
 'You will serve me by serving yourself for the moment. Later a time will come when I shall call
upon you to serve me in specific ways, but (for the moment) I ask little of you, save that you swear to
serve me.'
 Elric hesitated.
 'You must swear that,' said Arioch reasonably, 'or I cannot help you in the matter of your cousin
Yyrkoon or his sister Cymoril.'
 'I swear to serve you,' said Elric. And his body was flooded with ecstatic fire and he trembled with
joy and he fell to his knees.
 'Then I can tell you that, from time to time, you can call on my aid and I will come if your need is
truly desperate. I will come in whichever form is appropriate, or no form at all if that should prove
appropriate. And now you may ask me one question before I depart.'
 'I need the answers to two questions.'
 'Your first question I cannot answer. I will not answer. You must accept that you have now sworn to
serve me. I will not tell you what the future holds. But you need not fear, if you serve me well.'
 'Then my second question is this: Where is Prince Yyrkoon.'
 'Prince Yyrkoon is in the south, in a land of barbarians. By sorcery and by superior weapons and
intelligence he has effected the conquest of two mean nations, one of which is called Oin and the other of
which is called Yu. Even now he trains the men of Oin and the men of Yu to march upon Melnibone, for
he knows that your forces are spread thinly across the earth, searching for him.'
 'How has he hidden?'
 'He has not. But he has gained possession of the Mirror of Memory--a magical device whose hiding
place he discovered by his sorceries. Those who look into this mirror have their memories taken. The
mirror contains a million memories: the memories of all who have looked into it. Thus anyone who
ventures into Oin or Yu or travels by sea to the capital which serves both is confronted by the mirror and
forgets that he has seen Prince Yyrkoon and his Imrryrians in those lands. It is the best way of remaining
undiscovered.'
 'It is.' Elric drew his brows together. 'Therefore it might be wise to consider destroying the mirror.
But what would happen then, I wonder?'
 Arioch raised his beautiful hand. 'Although I have answered further questions which are, one could
argue, part of the same question, I will answer no more. It could be in your interest to destroy the mirror,
but it might be better to consider other means of countering its effects, for it does, I remind you, contain
many memories, some of which have been imprisoned for thousands of years. Now I must go. And you
must go--to the lands of Oin and Yu which lie several months' journey from here, to the south and well
beyond Lormyr. They are best reached by the Ship Which Sails Over Both Land and Sea. Farewell,
Elric.'
 And a fly buzzed for a moment upon the wall before vanishing.
 Elric rushed from the room, shouting for his slaves.


5

The Ship Which Sails Over
Land and Sea

 'AND HOW MANY dragons still sleep in the caverns?' Elric paced the gallery overlooking the city.
It was morning, but no sun came through the dull clouds which hung low upon the towers of the
Dreaming City. Imrryr's life continued unchanged in the streets below, save for the absence of the 
majority of her soldiers who had not yet returned home from their fruitless quests and would not be
home for many months to come.
 Dyvim Tvar leaned on the parapet of the gallery and stared unseeingly into the streets. His face was
tired and his arms were folded on his chest as if he sought to contain what was left of his strength.
 'Two perhaps. It would take a great deal to wake them and even then I doubt if they'd be useful to
us. What is this "Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea" which Arioch spoke of?'
 'I've read of it before--in the Silver Grimoire and in other tomes. A magic ship. Used by a
Melnibonean hero even before there was Melnibone and the empire. But where it exists, and if it exists, I
do not know.'
 'Who would know?' Dyvim Tvar straightened his back and turned it on the scene below.
 'Arioch?' Elric shrugged. 'But he would not tell me.'
 'What of your friends the Water Elementals. Have they not promised you aid? And would they not
be knowledgeable in the matter of ships?'
 Elric frowned, deepening the lines which now marked his face. 'Aye--Straasha might know. But I'm
loath to call on his aid again. The Water Elementals are not the powerful creatures that the Lords of
Chaos are. Their strength is limited and, moreover, they are inclined to be capricious, in the manner of
the elements. What is more, Dyvim Tvar, I hesitate to use sorcery, save where absolutely imperative...'
 'You are a sorcerer, Elric. You have but lately proved your greatness in that respect, involving the
most powerful of all sorceries, the summoning of a Chaos Lord--and you still hold back? I would
suggest, my lord king, that you consider such logic and that you judge it unsound. You decided to use
sorcery in your pursuit of Prince Yyrkoon. The die is already cast. It would be wise to use sorcery now.'
 'You cannot conceive of the mental and physical effort involved...'
 'I can conceive of it, my lord. I am your friend. I do not wish to see you pained--and yet...'
 'There is also the difficulty, Dyvim Tvar, of my physical weakness,' Elric reminded his friend. 'How
long can I continue in the use of these overstrong potions that now sustain me? They supply me with
energy, aye--but they do so by using up my few resources. I might die before I find Cymoril.'
 'I stand rebuked.'
 But Elric came forward and put his white hand on Dyvim Tvar's butter-coloured cloak. 'But what
have I to lose, eh? No. You are right. I am a coward to hesitate when Cymoril's life is at stake. I repeat
my stupidities--the stupidities which first brought this pass upon us all. I'll do it. Will you come with me
to the ocean?'
 'Aye.'
 Dyvim Tvar began to feel the burden of Elric's conscience settling upon him also. It was a peculiar
feeling to come to a Melnibonean and Dyvim Tvar knew very well that he liked it not at all.

 Elric had last ridden these paths when he and Cymoril were happy. It seemed a long age ago. He
had been a fool to trust that happiness. He turned his white stallion's head towards the cliffs and the sea
beyond them. A light rain fell. Winter was descending swiftly on Melnibone.
 They left their horses on the cliffs, lest they be disturbed by Elric's sorcery-working, and clambered
down to the shore. The rain fell into the sea. A mist hung over the water little more than five ship lengths
from the beach. It was deathly still and, with the tall, dark cliffs behind them and the wall of mist before
them, it seemed to Dyvim Tvar that they had entered a silent netherworld where might easily be
encountered the melancholy souls of those who, in legend, had committed suicide by a process of slow
self-mutilation. The sound of the two men's boots on shingle was loud and yet was at once muffled by
the mist which seemed to suck at noise and swallow it greedily as if it sustained its life on sound.
 'Now,' Elric murmured. He seemed not to notice the brooding and depressive surroundings. 'Now I
must recall the rune which came so easily, unsummoned, to my brain not many months since.' He left
Dyvim Tvar's side and went down to the place where the chill water lapped the land and there, carefully,
he seated himself, cross-legged. His eyes stared, unseeingly, into the mist.
 To Dyvim Tvar the tall albino appeared to shrink as he sat down. He seemed to become like a
vulnerable child and Dyvim Tvar's heart went out to Elric as it might go out to a brave, nervous boy, and
Dyvim Tvar had it in mind to suggest that the sorcery be done with and they seek the lands of Oin and
Yu by ordinary means.
 But Elric was already lifting his head as a dog lifts its head to the moon. And strange, thrilling
words began to tumble from his lips and it became plain that, even if Dyvim Tvar did speak now, Elric
would not hear him.
 Dyvim Tvar was no stranger to the High Speech--as a Melnibonean noble he had been taught it as a
matter of course--but the words seemed nonetheless strange to him, for Elric used peculiar inflections
and emphases, giving the words a special and secret weight and chanting them in a voice which ranged
from bass groan to falsetto shriek. It was not pleasant to listen to such noises coming from a mortal
throat and now Dyvim Tvar had some clear understanding of why Elric was reluctant to use sorcery. The
Lord of the Dragon Caves, Melnibonean though he was, found himself inclined to step backward a pace
or two, even to retire to the cliff-tops and watch over Elric from there, and he had to force himself to
hold his ground as the summoning continued.
 For a good space of time the rune-chanting went on. The rain beat harder upon the pebbles of the
shore and made them glisten. It dashed most ferociously into the still, dark sea, lashed about the fragile
head of the chanting, pale-haired figure, and caused Dyvim Tvar to shiver and draw his cloak more
closely about his shoulders.
 'Straasha--Straasha--Straasha...'
 The words mingled with the sound of the rain. They were now barely words at all but sounds which
the wind might make or a language which the sea might speak.
 'Straasha . . .'
 Again Dyvim Tvar had the impulse to move, but this time he desired to go to Elric and tell him to
stop, to consider some other means of reaching the lands of Oin and Yu.
 'Straasha!'
 There was a cryptic agony in the shout.
 'Straasha! '
 Elric's name formed on Dyvim Tvar's lips, but he found that he could not speak it.
 'Straasha!'
 The cross-legged figure swayed. The word became the calling of the wind through the Caverns of
Time.
 'Straasha!'

 It was plain to Dyvim Tvar that the rune was, for some reason, not working and that Elric was using
up all his strength to no effect. And yet there was nothing the Lord of the Dragon Caves could do. His
tongue was frozen. His feet seemed frozen. His feet seemed frozen to the ground.
 He looked at the mist. Had it crept closer to the shore? Had it taken on a strange, almost luminous,
green tinge? He peered closely.
 There was a massive disturbance of the water. The sea rushed up the beach. The shingle crackled.
The mist retreated. Vague lights flickered in the air and Dyvim Tvar thought he saw the shining
silhouette of a gigantic figure emerging from the sea and he realised that Elric's chant had ceased.
 'King Straasha,' Elric was saying in something approaching his normal tone. 'You have come. I
thank you.'
 The silhouette spoke and the voice reminded Dyvim Tvar of slow, heavy waves rolling beneath a
friendly sun.
 'We elementals are concerned, Elric, for there are rumours that you have invited Chaos Lords back
to your plane and the elementals have never loved the Lords of Chaos. Yet I know that if you have done
this it is because you are fated to do it and therefore we hold no enmity against you.'
 'The decision was forced upon me, King Straasha. There was no other decision I could make. If you
are therefore reluctant to aid me, I shall understand that and call on you no more.'
 'I will help you, though helping you is harder now, not for what happens in the immediate future but
what is hinted will happen in years to come. Now you must tell me quickly how we of the water can be
of service to you.'
 'Do you know ought of the Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea? I need to find that ship if I am to
fulfil my vow to find my love, Cymoril.'
 'I know much of that ship, for it is mine. Grome also lays claim to it. But it is mine. Fairly, it is
mine.'
 'Grome of the Earth?'
 'Grome of the Land Below the Roots. Grome of the Ground and all that lives, under it. My brother.
Grome. Long since, even as we elementals count time, Grome and I built that ship so that we could
travel between the realms of Earth and Water whenever we chose. But we quarrelled (may we be cursed
for such foolishness) and we fought. There were earthquakes, tidal waves, volcanic eruptions, typhoons
and battles in which all the elementals joined, with the result that new continents were flung up and old
ones drowned. It was not the first time we had fought each other, but it was the last. And finally, lest we
destroy each other completely, we made a peace. I gave Grome part of my domain and he gave me the
Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea. But he gave it somewhat unwillingly and thus it sails the sea better
than it sails the land, for Grome thwarts its progress whenever he can. Still, if the ship is of use to you,
you shall have it.'
 'I thank you, King Straasha. Where shall I find it?'
 'It will come. And now I grow weary, for the further from my own realm I venture, the harder it is
to sustain my mortal form. Farewell, Elric--and be cautious. You have a greater power than you know
and many would make use of it to their own ends,'
 'Shall I wait here for the Ship Which Sails Over Land and sea?'
 'No...' the Sea King's voice was fading as his form faded. Grey mist drifted back where the
silhouette and the green lights had been. The sea again was still. 'Wait. Wait in your tower... It will
come...'
 A few wavelets lapped the shore and then it was as if the king of the Water Elementals had never
been there at all. Dyvim Tvar rubbed his eyes. Slowly at first he began to move to where Elric still sat.
Gently he bent down and offered the albino his hand. Elric looked up in some surprise. 'Ah, Dyvim Tvar.
How much time has passed?'
 'Some hours, Elric. It will soon be night. What little light there is begins to wane. We had best ride
back for Imrryr.'
 Stiffly Elric rose to his feet, with Dyvim Tvar's assistance. 'Aye...' he murmured absently. 'The Sea
King said...'
 'I heard the Sea King, Elric. I heard his advice and I heard his warning. You must remember to heed
both. I like too little the sound of this magic boat. Like most things of sorcerous origin, the ship appears
to have vices as well as virtues, like a double-bladed knife which you raise to stab your enemy and
which, instead, stabs you...'
 'That must be expected where sorcery is concerned. It was you who urged me on, my friend.'
 'Aye,' said Dyvim Tvar almost to himself as he led the way up the cliff-path towards the horses.
'Aye. I have not forgotten that, my lord king.'
 Elric smiled wanly and touched Dyvim Tvar's arm. 'Worry not. The summoning is over and now we
have the vessel we need to take us swiftly to Prince Yyrkoon and the lands of Oin and Yu.'
 'Let us hope so.' Dyvim Tvar was privately sceptical about the benefits they would gain from the
Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea. They reached the horses and he began to wipe the water off the
flanks of his own roan. 'I regret,' he said, 'that we have once again allowed the dragons to expend their
energy on a useless endeavour. With a squadron of my beasts, we could do much against Prince 
Yyrkoon. And it would be fine and wild, my friend, to ride the skies again, side by side, as we used to.'
 'When all this is done and Princess Cymoril brought home, we shall do that,' said Elric, hauling
himself wearily into the saddle of his white stallion. 'You shall blow the Dragon Horn and our dragon
brothers will hear it and you and I shall sing the Song of the Dragon Masters and our goads shall flash as
we straddle Flamefang and his mate Sweetclaw. Ah, that will be like the days of old Melnibone, when
we no longer equate freedom with power, but let the Young Kingdoms go their own way and be certain
that they let us go ours!'
 Dyvim Tvar pulled on his horse's reins. His brow was clouded. 'Let us pray that day will come, my
lord. But I cannot help this nagging thought which tells me that Imrryr's days are numbered and that my
own life nears its close...'
 'Nonsense, Dyvim Tvar. You'll survive me. There's little doubt of that, though you be my elder.'
 Dyvim Tvar said, as they galloped back through the closing day: 'I have two sons. Did you know
that, Elric?'
 'You have never mentioned them.'
 'They are by old mistresses.'
 'I am happy for you.'
 'They are fine Melniboneans.'
 'Why do you mention this, Dyvim Tvar?' Elric tried to read his friend's expression.
 'It is that I love them and would have them enjoy the pleasures of the Dragon Isle.'
 'And why should they not?'
 'I do not know.' Dyvim Tvar looked hard at Elric. 'I could suggest that it is your responsibility, the
fate of my sons, Elric.'
 'Mine?'
 'It seems to me, from what I gathered from the Water Elemental's words, that your decisions could
decide the fate of the Dragon Isle. I ask you to remember my sons, Elric.'
 'I shall, Dyvim Tvar. I am certain they shall grow into superb Dragon Masters and that one of them
shall succeed you as Lord of the Dragon Caves.'
 'I think you miss my meaning, my lord emperor.'
 And Elric looked solemnly at his friend and shook his head. 'I do not miss your meaning, old friend.
But I think you judge me harshly if you fear I'll do ought to threaten Melnibone and all she is.'
 'Forgive me, then.' Dyvim Tvar lowered his head. But the expression in his eyes did not change.

 In Imrryr they changed their clothes and drank hot wine and had spiced food brought. Elric, for all
his weariness, was in better spirits than he had been for many a month. And yet there was still a tinge of
something behind his surface mood which suggested he encouraged himself to speak gaily and put
vitality into his movements. Admittedly, thought Dyvim Tvar, the prospects had improved and soon they
would be confronting Prince Yyrkoon. But the dangers ahead of them were unknown, the pitfalls
probably considerable. Still, he did not, out of sympathy for his friend, want to dispel Elric's mood. He
was glad, in fact, that Elric seemed in a more positive frame of mind. There was talk of the equipment
they would need in their expedition to the mysterious lands of Yu and Oin, speculation concerning the
capacity of the Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea--how many men it would take, what provisions they
should put aboard and so on.
 When Elric went to his bed, he did not walk with the dragging tiredness which had previously
accompanied his step and again, bidding him goodnight, Dyvim Tvar was struck by the same emotion
which had filled him on the beach, watching Elric begin his rune. Perhaps it was not by chance that he
had used the example of his sons when speaking to Elric earlier that day, for he had a feeling that was
almost protective, as if Elric were a boy looking forward to some treat which might not bring him the joy
he expected.
 Dyvim Tvar dismissed the thoughts, as best he could, and went to his own bed. Elric might blame 
himself for all that had occurred in the question of Yyrkoon and Cymoril, but Dyvim Tvar wondered if
he, too, were not to blame in some part. Perhaps he should have offered his advice more cogently--more
vehemently, even--earlier and made a stronger attempt to influence the young emperor. And then, in the
Melnibonean manner, he dismissed such doubts and questions as pointless. There was only one rule--
seek pleasure however you would. But had that always been the Melnibonean way? Dyvim Tvar
wondered suddenly if Elric might not have regressive rather than deficient blood. Could Elric be a
reincarnation of one of their most distant ancestors? Had it always been in the Melnibonean character to
think only of oneself and one's own gratification?
 And again Dyvim Tvar dismissed the questions. What use was there in questions, after all? The
world was the world. A man was a man. Before he sought his own bed he went to visit both his old
mistresses, waking them up and insisting that he see his sons, Dyvim Slorm and Dyvim Mav and when
his sons, sleepy-eyed, bewildered, had been brought to him, he stared at them for a long while before
sending them back. He had said nothing to either, but he had brought his brows together frequently and
rubbed at his face and shaken his head and, when they had gone, had said to Niopal and Saramal, his
mistresses, who were as bewildered as their offspring, 'Let them be taken to the Dragon Caves tomorrow
and begin their learning.'
 'So soon, Dyvim Tvar?' said Niopal.
 'Aye. There's little time left, I fear.'
 He would not amplify on this remark because he could not. It was merely a feeling he had. But it
was a feeling that was growing almost to the point where it was becoming an obsession with him.

 In the morning Dyvim Tvar returned to Elric's tower and found the emperor pacing the gallery
above the city, asking eagerly for any news of a ship sighted off the coast of the island. But no such ship
had been seen. Servants answered earnestly that if their emperor could describe the ship, it would be
easier for them to know for what to look, but he could not describe the ship, and could only hint that it
might not be seen on water at all, but might appear on land. He was all dressed up in his black war gear
and it was plain to Dyvim Tvar that Elric was indulging in even larger quantities of the potions which
replenished his blood. The crimson eyes gleamed with a hot vitality, the speech was rapid and the bonewhite
hands moved with unnatural speed when Elric made even the lightest gesture.
 'Are you well this morning, my lord?' asked the Dragon Master.
 'In excellent spirits, thank you, Dyvim Tvar.' Elric grinned. 'Though I'd feel even better if the Ship
Which Sails Over Land and Sea were here now.' He went to the balustrade and leaned upon it, peering
over the towers and beyond the city walls, looking first to the sea and then to the land. 'Where can it be?
I wish that King Straasha had been able to be more specific.'
 'I'll agree with that.' Dyvim Tvar, who had not breakfasted, helped himself from the variety of
succulent foods laid upon the table. It was evident that Elric had eaten nothing.
 Dyvim Tvar began to wonder if the volume of potions had not affected his old friend's brain;
perhaps madness, brought about by his involvement with complicated sorcery, his anxiety for Cymoril,
his hatred of Yyrkoon, had begun to overwhelm Elric.
 'Would it not be better to rest and to wait until the ship is sighted?' he suggested quietly as he wiped
his lips.
 'Aye--there's reason in that,' Elric agreed. 'But I cannot. I have an urge to be off, Dyvim Tvar, to
come face to face with Yyrkoon, to have my revenge on him, to be united with Cymoril again.'
 'I understand that. Yet, still...'
 Elric's laugh was loud and ragged. 'You fret like Tanglebones over my well-being. I do not need
two nursemaids, Lord of the Dragon Caves.'
 With an effort Dyvim Tvar smiled. 'You are right. Well, I pray that this magical vessel--what is
that?' He pointed out across the island. 'A movement in yonder forest. As if the wind passes through it.
But there is no sign of wind elsewhere.'
 Elric followed his gaze. 'You are right. I wonder...'
 And then they saw something emerge from the forest and the land itself seemed to ripple. It was
something which glinted white and blue and black. It came closer.
 'A sail,' said Dyvim Tvar. 'It is your ship, I think, my lord.'
 'Aye,' Elric whispered, craning forward. 'My ship. Make yourself ready, Dyvim Tvar. By midday
we shall be gone from Imrryr.'


6

What the Earth God Desired

 THE SHIP WAS tall and slender and she was delicate. Her rails, masts and bulwarks were
exquisitely carved and obviously not the work of a mortal craftsman. Though built of wood, the wood
was not painted but naturally shone blue and black and green and a kind of deep smoky red, and her
rigging was the colour of sea-weed and there were veins in the planks of her polished deck, like the roots
of trees, and the sails on her three tapering masts were as fat and white and light as clouds on a fine
summer day. The ship was everything that was lovely in nature; few could look upon her and not feel
delighted, as they might be delighted upon sighting a perfect view. In a word, the ship radiated harmony,
and Elric could think of no finer vessel in which to sail against Prince Yyrkoon and the dangers of the
lands of Oin and Yu.
 The ship sailed gently in the ground as if upon the surface of a river and the earth beneath the keel
rippled as if turned momentarily to water. Wherever the keel of the ship touched, and a few feet around
it, this effect became evident, though, after the ship had passed, the ground would return to its usual
stable state. This was why the trees of the forest had swayed as the ship passed through them, parting
before the keel as the ship sailed towards Imrryr.
 The Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea was not particularly large. Certainly she was considerably
smaller than a Melnibonean battle-barge and only a little bigger than a southern galley. But the grace of
her; the curve of her line; the pride of her bearing--in these, she had no rival at all.
 Already her gangplanks had been lowered down to the ground and she was being made ready for
her journey. Elric, hands on his slim hips, stood looking up at King Straasha's gift. From the gates of the
city wall slaves were bearing provisions and arms and carrying them up the gangways. Meanwhile
Dyvim Tvar was assembling the Imrryrian warriors and assigning them their ranks and duties while on
the expedition. There were not many warriors. Only half the available strength could come with the ship,
for the other half must remain behind under the command of Admiral Magum Colim and protect the city.
It was unlikely that there would be any large attack on Melnibone after the punishment meted out to the
barbarian fleet, but it was wise to take precautions, particularly since Prince Yyrkoon had vowed to
conquer Imrryr. Also, for some strange reason that none of the onlookers could divine, Dyvim Tvar had
called for volunteers--veterans who shared a common disability--and made up a special detachment of
these men who, so the onlookers thought, could be of no use at all on the expedition. Still, neither were
they of use when it came to defending the city, so they might as well go. These veterans were led aboard
first.
 Last to climb the gangway was Elric himself. He walked slowly, heavily, a proud figure in his black
armour, until he reached the deck. Then he turned, saluted his city, and ordered the gangplank raised.
 Dyvim Tvar was waiting for him on the poop-deck. The Lord of the Dragon Caves had stripped off
one of his gauntlets and was running his naked hand over the oddly coloured wood of the rail. 'This is
not a ship made for war, Elric,' he said. 'I should not like to see it harmed.'
 'How can it be harmed?' Elric asked lightly as Imrryian's began to climb the rigging and adjust the
sails. 'Would Straasha let it be destroyed? Would Grome? Fear not for the Ship Which Sails Over Land 
and Sea, Dyvim Tvar. Fear only for our own safety and the success of our expedition. Now, let us
consult the charts. Remembering Straasha's warning concerning his brother Grome, I suggest we travel
by sea for as far as possible, calling in here...' he pointed to a sea-port on the western coast of Lormyr--
'to get our bearings and learn what we can of the lands of Oin and Yu and how those lands are defended.'
 'Few travellers have ever ventured beyond Lormyr. It is said that the edge of the world lies not far
from that country's most southerly borders.' Dyvim Tvar frowned. 'Could not this whole mission be a
trap, I wonder? Arioch's trap? What if he is in league with Prince Yyrkoon and we have been completely
deceived into embarking upon an expedition which will destroy us?'
 'I have considered that,' said Elric. 'But there is no other choice. We must trust Arioch.'
 'I suppose we must.' Dyvim Tvar smiled ironically. 'Another matter now occurs to me. How does
the ship move? I saw no anchors we could raise and there are no tides that I know of that sweep across
the land. The wind fills the sails--see.' It was true. The sails were billowing and the masts creaked
slightly as they took the strain.
 Elric shrugged and spread his hands. 'I suppose we must tell the ship,' he suggested. 'Ship--we are
ready to sail.'
 Elric took some pleasure in Dyvim Tvar's expression of astonishment as, with a lurch, the ship
began to move. It sailed smoothly, as over a calm sea, and Dyvim Tvar instinctively clutched the rail,
shouting: 'But we are heading directly for the city wall!'
 Elric crossed quickly to the centre of the poop where a large lever lay, horizontally attached to a
ratchet which in turn was attached to a spindle. This was almost certainly the steering gear. Elric grasped
the lever as one might grasp an oar and pushed it round a notch or two. Immediately the ship responded--
and turned towards another part of the wall! Elric hauled back on the lever and the ship leaned,
protesting a little as she yawed around and began to head out across the island. Elric laughed in delight.
'You see, Dyvim Tvar, it is easy? A slight effort of logic was all it took!'
 'Nonetheless,' said Dyvim Tvar suspiciously, 'I'd rather we rode dragons. At least they are beasts
and may be understood. But this sorcery, it troubles me.'
 'Those are not fitting words for a noble of. Melnibone!' Elric shouted above the sound of the wind in
the rigging, the creaking of the ship's timbers, the slap of the great white sails.
 'Perhaps not,' said Dyvim Tvar. 'Perhaps that explains why I stand beside you now, my lord.'
 Elric darted his friend a puzzled look before he went below to find a helmsman whom he could
teach how to steer the ship.
 The ship sped swiftly over rocky slopes and up gorse-covered hills; she cut her way through forests
and sailed grandly over grassy plains. She moved like a low-flying hawk which keeps close to the
ground but progresses with incredible speed and accuracy as it searches for its prey, altering its course
with an imperceptible flick of a wing. The soldiers of Imrryr crowded her decks, gasping in amazement
at the ship's progress over the land, and many of the men had to be clouted back to their positions at the
sails or elsewhere about the ship. The huge warrior who acted as bosun seemed the only member of the
crew unaffected by the miracle of the ship. He was behaving as he would normally behave aboard one of
the golden battle-barges; going solidly about his duties and seeing to it that all was done in a proper
seamanly manner. The helmsman Elric had selected was, on the other hand, wide-eyed and somewhat
nervous of the ship he handled. You could see that he felt he was, at any moment, going to be dashed
against a slab of rock or smash the ship apart in a tangle of thick-trunked pines. He was forever wetting
his lips and wiping sweat from his brow, even though the air was sharp and his breath steamed as it left
his throat. Yet he was a good helmsman and gradually he became used to handling the ship, though his
movements were, perforce, more rapid, for there was little time to deliberate upon a decision, the ship
travelled with such speed over the land. The speed was breathtaking; they sped more swiftly than any
horse--were swifter, even, than Dyvim Tvar's beloved dragons. Yet the motion was exhilarating, too, as
the expressions on the faces of all the Imrryrians told.
 Elric's delighted laughter rang through the ship and infected many another member of the crew.
 'Well, if Grome of the Roots is trying to block our progress, I hesitate to guess how fast we shall
travel when we reach water!' he called to Dyvim Tvar.
 Dyvim Tvar had lost some of his earlier mood. His long, fine hair streamed around his face as he
smiled at his friend. 'Aye--we shall all be whisked off the deck and into the sea!'
 And then, as if in answer to their words, the ship began suddenly to buck and at the same time sway
from side to side, like a ship caught in powerful cross-currents. The helmsman went white and clung to
his lever, trying to get the ship back under control. There came a brief, terrified yell and a sailor fell from
the highest cross-tree in the main mast and crashed onto the deck, breaking every bone in his body. And
then the ship swayed once or twice and the turbulence was behind them and they continued on their
course.
 Elric stared at the body of the fallen sailor. Suddenly the mood of gaiety left him completely and he
gripped the rail in his black gauntleted hands and he gritted his strong teeth and his crimson eyes glowed
and his lips curled in self-mockery. 'What a fool I am. What a fool I am to tempt the gods so!'
 Still, though the ship moved almost as swiftly as it had done, there seemed to be something
dragging at it, as if Grome's minions clung on to the bottom as barnacles might cling in the sea. And
Elric sensed something around him in the air, something in the rustling of the trees through which they
passed, something in the movement of the grass and the bushes and the flowers over which they crossed,
something in the weight of the rocks, of the angle of the hills. And he knew that what he sensed was the
presence of Grome of the Ground--Grome of the Land Below the Roots--Grome, who desired to own
what he and his brother Straasha had once owned jointly, what they had had made as a sign of the unity
between them and over which they had then fought. Grome wanted very much to take back the Ship
Which Sails Over Land and Sea. And Elric, staring down at the black earth, became afraid.


7

King Grome

 BUT AT LAST, with the land tugging at their keel, they reached the sea, sliding into the water and
gathering speed with every moment, until Melnibone was gone behind them and they were sighting the
thick clouds of steam which hung forever over the Boiling Sea. Elric thought it unwise to risk even this
magical vessel in those peculiar waters, so the vessel was turned and headed for the coast of Lormyr,
sweetest and most tranquil of the Young Kingdom nations, and the port of Ramasaz on Lormyr's western
shore. If the southern barbarians with whom they had so recently fought had been from Lormyr, Elric
would have considered making for some other port, but the barbarians had almost certainly been from
the South-East on the far side of the continent, beyond Pikarayd. The Lormyrians, under their fat,
cautious King Fadan, were not likely to join a raid unless its success were completely assured. Sailing
slowly into Ramasaz, Elric gave instructions that their ship be moored in a conventional way and treated
like any ordinary ship. It attracted attention, nonetheless, for its beauty, and the inhabitants of the port
were astonished to find Melniboneans crewing the vessel. Though Melniboneans were disliked
throughout the Young Kingdoms, they were also feared. Thus, outwardly at any rate, Elric and his men
were treated with respect and were served reasonably good food and wine in the hostelries they entered.
 In the largest of the waterfront inns, a place called Heading Outward and Coming Safely Home
Again, Elric found a garrulous host who had, until he bought the inn, been a prosperous fisherman and
who knew the southernmost shores reasonably well. He certainly knew the lands of Oin and Yu, but he
had no respect for them at all.
 'You think they could be massing for war, my lord.' He raised his eyebrows at Elric before hiding
his face in his wine-mug. Wiping his lips, he shook his red head. "Then they must war against sparrows.
Oin and Yu are barely nations at all. Their only halfway decent city is Dhoz-Kam--and that is shared 
between them, half being on one side of the River Ar and half being on the other. As for the rest of Oin
and Yu--it is inhabited by peasants who are for the most part so ill-educated and superstition-ridden that
they are poverty-striken. Not a potential soldier among 'em.'
 'You've heard nothing of a Melnibonean renegade who has conquered Oin and Yu and set about
training these peasants to make war?' Dyvim Tvar leaned on the bar next to Elric. He sipped fastidiously
from a thick cup of wine. 'Prince Yyrkoon is the renegade's name.'
 'Is that whom you seek?' The innkeeper became more interested. 'A dispute between the Dragon
Princes, eh?'
 'That's our business,' said Elric haughtily.
 'Of course, my lords.'
 'You know nothing of a great mirror which steals men's memories?' Dyvim Tvar asked.
 'A magical mirror!' The innkeeper threw back his head and laughed heartily. 'I doubt if there's one
decent mirror in the whole of Oin or Yu! No, my lords, I think you are misled if you fear danger from
those lands!"
 'Doubtless you are right, ' said Elric, staring down into his own untasted wine. 'But it would be wise
if we were to check for ourselves--and it would be in Lormyr's interests, too, if we were to find what we
seek and warn you accordingly.'
 'Fear not for Lormyr. We can deal easily with any silly attempt to make war from that quarter. But
if you'd see for yourselves, you must follow the coast for three days until you come to a great bay. The
River Ar runs into that bay and on the shores of the river lies Dhoz-Kam--a seedy sort of city,
particularly for a capital serving two nations. The inhabitants are corrupt, dirty and disease-ridden, but
fortunately they are also lazy and thus afford little trouble, especially if you keep a sword by you. When
you have spent an hour in Dhoz-Kam, you will realise the impossibility of such folk becoming a menace
to anyone else, unless they should get close enough to you to infect you with one of their several
plagues!' Again the innkeeper laughed hugely at his own wit. As he ceased shaking, he added: 'Or unless
you fear their navy. It consists of a dozen or so filthy fishing boats, most of which are so unseaworthy
they dare only fish the shallows of the estuary.'
 Elric pushed his wine-cup aside. 'We thank you, landlord.' He placed a Melnibonean silver piece
upon the counter.
 'This will be hard to change,' said the innkeeper craftily.
 'There is no need to change it on our account,' Elric told him.
 'I thank you, masters. Would you stay the night at my establishment. I can offer you the finest beds
in Ramasaz.'
 'I think not,' Elric told him. 'We shall sleep aboard out ship tonight, that we might be ready to sail at
dawn.'
 The landlord watched the Melniboneans depart. Instinctively he bit at the silver piece and then,
suspecting he tasted something odd about it, removed it from his mouth. He stared at the coin, turning it
this way and that. Could Melnibonean silver be poisonous to an ordinary mortal? he wondered. It was
best not to take risks. He tucked the coin into his purse and collected up the two wine-cups they had left
behind. Though he hated waste, he decided it would be wiser to throw the cups out lest they should have
become tainted in some way.

 The Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea reached the bay at noon on the following day and now it
lay close inshore, hidden from the distant city by a short isthmus on which grew thick, near-tropical
foliage. Elric and Dyvim Tvar waded through the clear, shallow water to the beach and entered the
forest. They had decided to be cautious and not make their presence known until they had determined the
truth of the innkeeper's contemptuous description of Dhoz-Kam. Near the tip of the isthmus was a
reasonably high hill and growing on the hill were several good-sized trees. Elric and Dyvim Tvar used
their swords to clear a path through the undergrowth and made their way up the hill until they stood 
under the trees, picking out the one most easily climbed. Elric selected a tree whose trunk bent and then
straightened out again. He sheathed his sword, got his hands onto the trunk and hauled himself up,
clambering along until he reached a succession of thick branches which would bear his weight. In the
meantime Dyvim Tvar climbed another nearby tree until at last both men could get a good view across
the bay where the city of Dhoz-Kam could be clearly seen. Certainly the city itself deserved the
innkeeper's description. It was squat and grimy and evidently poor. Doubtless this was why Yyrkoon had
chosen it, for the lands of Oin and Yu could not have been hard to conquer with the help of a handful of
well-trained Imrryrians and some of Yyrkoon's sorcerous allies. Indeed, few would have bothered to
conquer such a place, since its wealth was plainly virtually non-existent and its geographical position of
no strategic importance. Yyrkoon had chosen well, for purposes of secrecy if nothing else. But the
landlord had been wrong about Dhoz-Kam's fleet. Even from here Elric and Dyvim Tvar could make out
a good thirty good-sized warships in the harbour and there seemed to be more anchored up-river. But the
ships did not interest them as much as the thing which flashed and glittered above the city--something
which had been mounted on huge pillars which supported an axle which, in turn, supported a vast,
circular mirror set in a frame whose workmanship was as plainly non-mortal as that of the ship which
had brought the Melniboneans here. There was no doubt that they looked upon the Mirror of Memory
and that any who had sailed into t. he harbour after it had been erected must have had their memory of
what they had seen stolen from them instantly.
 'It seems to me, my lord,' said Dyvim Tvar from his perch a yard or two away from Elric, 'that it
would be unwise of us to sail directly into the harbour of Dhoz-Kam. Indeed, we could be in danger if
we entered the bay. I think that we look upon the mirror, even now, only because it is not pointed
directly at us. But you notice there is machinery to turn it in any direction its user chooses--save one. It
cannot be turned inland, behind the city. There is no need for it, for who would approach Oin and Yu
from the wastelands beyond their borders and who but the inhabitants of Oin or Yu would need to come
overland to their capital?'
 'I think I take your meaning, Dyvim Tvar. You suggest that we would be wise to make use of the
special properties of our ship and...'
 '... and go overland to Dhoz-Kam, striking suddenly and making full use of those veterans we
brought with us, moving swiftly and ignoring Prince Yyrkoon's new allies--seeking the prince himself,
and his renegades. Could we do that, Elric? Dash into the city--seize Yyrkoon, rescue Cymoril--then
speed out again and away?'
 'Since we have too few men to make a direct assault, it is all we can do, though it's dangerous. The
advantage of surprise would be lost, of course, once we had made the attempt. If we failed in our first
attempt it would become much harder to attack a second time. The alternative is to sneak into the city at
night and hope to locate Yyrkoon and Cymoril alone, but then we should not be making use of our one
important weapon, the Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea. I think your plan is the best one, Dyvim
Tvar. Let us turn the ship inland, now, and hope that Grome takes his time in finding us--for I still worry
lest he try seriously to wrest the ship from our possession.' Elric began to climb down towards the
ground.

 Standing once more upon the poop-deck of the lovely ship, Elric ordered the helmsman to turn the
vessel once again towards the land. Under half-sail the ship moved gracefully through the water and up
the curve of the bank and the flowering shrubs of the forest parted before its prow and then they were
sailing through the green dark of the jungle, while startled birds cawed and shrilled and little animals
paused in astonishment and peered down from the trees at the Ship Which Sails Over Land and Sea and
some almost lost their balance as the graceful boat progressed calmly over the floor of the forest, turning
aside for only the thickest of the trees.
 And thus they made their way to the interior of the land called Oin, which lay to the north of the
River Ar, which marked the border between Oin and the land called Yu with which Oin shared a single 
capital.
 Oin was a country consisting largely of unforested jungle and infertile plains where the inhabitants
farmed, for they feared the forest and would not go into it, even though that was where Oin's wealth
might be found.
 The ship sailed well enough through the forest and out over the plain and soon they could see a
large lake glinting ahead of them and Dyvim Tvar, glancing at the crude map with which he had
furnished himself in Ramasaz, suggested that they begin to turn towards the south again and approach
Dhoz-Kam by means of a wide semi-circle. Elric agreed and the ship began to tack round.
 It was then that the land began to heave again and huge waves of grassy earth this time rolled
around the ship and blotted out the surrounding view. The ship pitched wildly up and down and from
side to side. Two more Imrryrians fell from the rigging and were killed on the deck below. The bosun
was shouting loudly--though in fact all this upheaval was happening in silence--and the silence made the
situation seem that much more menacing. The bosun yelled to his men to tie themselves to their
positions. 'And all those not doing anything--get below at once!' he added.
 Elric had wound a scarf around the rail and tied the other end to his wrist. Dyvim Tvar had used a
long belt for the same purpose. But still they were flung in all directions, often losing their footing as the
ship bucked this way and that, and every bone in Elric's body seemed about to crack and every inch of
his flesh seemed bruised. And the ship was creaking and protesting and threatening to break up under the
awful strain of riding the heaving land.
 'Is this Grome's work, Elric?' Dyvim Tvar panted. 'Or is it some sorcery of Yyrkoon's?'
 Elric shook his head. 'Not Yyrkoon. It is Grome. And I know no way to placate him. Not Grome,
who thinks least of all the Kings of the Elements, yet, perhaps, is the most powerful.'
 'But surely he breaks his bargain with his brother by doing this to us?'
 'No. I think not. King Straasha warned us this might happen. We can only hope that Grome expends
all his energy and that the ship survives, as it might survive a natural storm at sea.'
 'This is worse than a sea-storm, Elric!'
 Elric nodded his agreement but could say nothing, for the deck was tilting at a crazy angle and he
had to cling to the rails with both hands in order to retain any kind of footing.
 And now the silence stopped.
 Instead they heard a rumbling and a roaring that seemed to have something of the character of
laughter.
 'King Grome!' Elric shouted. 'King Grome! Let us be! We have done you no harm!'
 But the laughter increased and it made the whole ship quiver as the land rose and fell around it, as
trees and hills and rocks rushed towards the ship and then fell away again, never quite engulfing them,
for Grome doubtless wanted his ship intact.
 'Grome! You have no quarrel with mortals!' Elric cried again. 'Let us be! Ask a favour of us if you
must, but grant us this favour in return!'
 Elric was shouting almost anything that came into his head. Really, he had no hope of being heard
by the earth god and he did not expect King Grome to bother to listen even if the elemental did hear. But
there was nothing else to do.
 'Grome! Grome! Grome! Listen to me!'
 Elric's only response was in the louder laughter which made every nerve in him tremble. And the
earth heaved higher and dropped lower and the ship spun round and round until Elric was sure he would
lose his senses entirely.
 'King Grome! King Grome! Is it just to slay those who have never done you harm?'
 And then, slowly, the heaving earth subsided and the ship was still and a huge, brown figure stood
looking down at the ship. The figure was the colour of earth and looked like a vast, old oak. His hair and
his beard were the colour of leaves and his eyes were the colour of gold ore and his teeth were the colour
of granite and his feet were like roots and his skin seemed covered in tiny green shoots in place of hair 
and he smelled rich and musty and good and he was King Grome of the Earth Elementals. He sniffed and
he frowned and he said in a soft, mighty voice that was yet coarse and grumpy: 'I want my ship.'
 'It is not our ship to give, King Grome,' said Elric.
 Grome's tone of petulance increased. 'I want my
 ship,' he said slowly. 'I want the thing. It is mine.'
 'Of what use is it to you, King Grome?'
 'Use? It is mine.'
 Grome stamped and the land rippled.
 Elric said desperately: 'It is your brother's ship, King Grome. It is King Straasha's ship. He gave you
part of his domain and you allowed him to keep the ship. That was the bargain.'
 'I know nothing of a bargain. The ship is mine.'
 'You know that if you take the ship then King Straasha will have to take back the land he gave you.'
 'I want my ship.' The huge figure shifted its position and bits of earth fell from it, landing with
distinctly heard thuds on the ground below and on the deck of the ship.
 'Then you must kill us to obtain it,' Elric said.
 'Kill? Grome does not kill mortals. He kills nothing. Grome builds. Grome brings to life.'
 'You have already killed three of our company,' Elric pointed out. 'Three are dead, King Grome,
because you made the land-storm.'
 Grome's great brows drew together and he scratched his great head, causing an immense rustling
noise to sound. 'Grome does not kill,' he said again.
 'King Grome has killed,' said Elric reasonably. 'Three lives lost.'
 ' Grome grunted. 'But I want my ship,'
 'The ship is lent to us by your brother. We cannot give it to you. Besides, we sail in it for a purpose--
a noble purpose, I think. We...'
 'I know nothing of "purposes"--and care nothing for you. I want my ship. My brother should not
have lent it to you. I had almost forgotten it. But now that I remember it, I want it.'
 'Will you not accept something else in place of the ship, King Grome?' said Dyvim Tvar suddenly.
'Some other gift.'
 Grome shook his monstrous head. 'How could a mortal give me something? It is mortals who take
from me all the time. They steal my bones and my blood and my flesh. Could you give me back all that
your kind has taken?'
 'Is there not one thing?' Elric said.
 Grome closed his eyes.
 'Precious metals? Jewels?' suggested Dyvim Tvar.
 'We have many such in Melnibone.'
 'I have plenty,' said King Grome.
 Elric shrugged in despair. 'How can we bargain with a god, Dyvim Tvar?' He gave a bitter smile.
'What can the Lord of the Soil desire? More sun, more rain? These are not ours to give.'
 'I am a rough sort of god,' said Grome, 'if indeed god I am. But I did not mean to kill your
comrades. I have an idea. Give me the bodies of the slain. Bury them in my earth.'
 Elric's heart leapt. 'That is all you wish of us.'
 'It would seem much to me.'
 'And for that you will let us sail on?'
 'On water, aye,' growled Grome. 'But I do not see why I should allow you to sail over my land. It is
too much to expect of me. You can go to yonder lake, but from now this ship will only possess the
properties bestowed upon it by my brother Straasha. No longer shall it cross my domain.'
 'But, King Grome, we need this ship. We are upon urgent business. We need to sail to the city
yonder.' Elric pointed in the direction of Dhoz-Kam.
 'You may go to the lake, but after that the ship will sail only on water. Now give me what I ask.'
 Elric called down to the bosun who, for the first time, seemed amazed by what he was witnessing.
'Bring up the bodies of the three dead men.'
 The bodies were brought up from below. Grome stretched out one of his great, earthy hands and
picked them up.
 'I thank you,' he growled. 'Farewell.'
 And slowly Grome began to descend into the ground, his whole huge frame becoming, atom by
atom, absorbed with the earth until he was gone.
 And then the ship was moving again, slowly towards the lake, on the last short voyage it would ever
make upon the land.
 'And thus our plans are thwarted,' said Elric.
 Dyvim Tvar looked miserably towards the shining lake. 'Aye. So much for that scheme. I hesitate to
suggest this to you, Elric, but I fear we must resort to sorcery again if we are to stand any chance of
achieving our goal.'
 Elric sighed.
 'I fear we must,' he said.


 8

 The City and the Mirror

 PRINCE YYRKOON WAS pleased. His plans went well. He peered through the high fence which
enclosed the flat roof of his house (three storeys high and the finest in Dhoz-Kam); he looked out
towards the harbour at his splendid, captured fleet. Every ship which had come to Dhoz-Kam and which
had not flown the standard of a powerful nation had been easily taken after its crew had looked upon the
great mirror which squatted on its pillars above the city. Demons had built those pillars and Prince
Yyrkoon had paid them for their work with the souls of all those in Oin and Yu who had resisted him.
Now there was one last ambition to fulfil and then he and his new followers would be on their way to
Melnibone...
 He turned and spoke to his sister. Cymoril lay on a wooden bench, staring unseeingly at the sky,
clad in the filthy tatters of the dress she had been wearing when Yyrkoon abducted her from her tower.
 'See our fleet, Cymoril! While the golden barges are scattered we shall sail unhampered into Imrryr
and declare the city ours. Elric cannot defend himself against us now. He fell so easily into my trap. He
is a fool! And you were a fool to give him your affection!'
 Cymoril made no response. Through all the months she had been away, Yyrkoon had drugged her
food and drink and produced in her a lassitude which rivalled Elric's undrugged condition. Yyrkoon's
own experiments with his sorcerous powers had turned him gaunt, wild-eyed and somewhat mangy; he
ceased to take any pains with his physical appearance. But Cymoril had a wasted, haunted look to her,
for all that beauty remained. It was as if Dhoz-Kam's rundown seediness had infected them both in
different ways.
 'Fear not for your own future, however, my sister,' Yyrkoon continued. He chuckled. 'You shall still
be empress and sit beside the emperor on his Ruby Throne. Only I shall be emperor and Elric shall die
for many days and the manner of his death will be more inventive than anything he thought to do to me.'
 Cymoril's voice was hollow and distant. She did not turn her head when she spoke. 'You are insane,
Yyrkoon.'
 'Insane? Come now, sister, is that a word that a true Melnibonean should use? We Melniboneans
judge nothing sane or insane. What a man is--he is. What he does--he does. Perhaps you have stayed too
long in the Young Kingdoms and its judgments are becoming yours. But that shall soon be righted. We
shall return to the Dragon Isle in triumph and you will forget all this, just as if you yourself had - looked 
into the Mirror of Memory.' He darted a nervous glance upwards, as if he half-expected the mirror to be
turned on him.
 Cymoril closed her eyes. Her breathing was heavy and very slow; she was bearing this nightmare
with fortitude, certain that Elric must eventually rescue her from it. That hope was all that had stopped
her from destroying herself. If the hope went altogether, then she would bring about her own death and
be done with Yyrkoon and all his horrors.
 'Did I tell you that last night I was successful? I raised demons, Cymoril. Such powerful, dark
demons. I learned from them all that was left for me to learn. And I opened the Shade Gate at last. Soon I
shall pass through it and there I shall find what I seek. I shall become the most powerful mortal on earth.
Did I tell you all this, Cymoril?'
 He had, in fact, repeated himself several times that morning, but Cymoril had paid no more
attention to him than she did now. She felt so tired. She tried to sleep. She said slowly, as if to remind
herself of something: 'I hate you, Yyrkoon.'
 'Ah, but you shall love me soon, Cymoril. Soon.' 'Elric will come...'
 'Elric! Ha! He sits twiddling his thumbs in his tower, waiting for news that will never come--save
when I bring it to him!'
 'Elric will come,' she said.
 Yyrkoon snarled. A brute-faced Oinish girl brought him his morning wine. Yyrkoon seized the cup
and sipped the stuff. Then he spat it at the girl who, trembling, ducked away. Yyrkoon took the jug and
emptied it onto the white dust of the roof. 'This is Elric's thin blood. This is how it will flow away!'
 But again Cymoril was not listening, She was trying to remember her albino lover and the few
sweet days they had spent together since they were children.
 Yyrkoon hurled the empty jug at the girl's head, but she was adept at dodging him. As she dodged,
she murmured her standard response to all his attacks and insults. 'Thank you, Demon Lord,' she said.
'Thank you, Demon Lord.'
 Yyrkoon laughed. 'Aye. Demon Lord. Your folk are right to call me that, for I rule more demons
than I rule men. My power increases every day!'
 The Oinish girl hurried away to fetch more wine, for she knew he would be calling for it in a
moment. Yyrkoon crossed the roof to stare through the slats in the fence at the proof of his power, but as
he looked upon his ships he heard sounds of confusion from the other side of the roof. Could the Yurits
and the Oinish be fighting amongst themselves? Where were their Imrryrian centurions. Where was
Captain Valharik?
 He almost ran across the roof, passing Cymoril who appeared to be sleeping, and peered down into
the streets.
 'Fire?' he murmured. 'Fire?'
 It was true that the streets appeared to be on fire. And yet it was not an ordinary fire. Balls of fire
seemed to drift about, igniting rush-thatched roofs, doors, anything which would easily burn--as an
invading army might put a village to the torch.
 Yyrkoon scowled, thinking at first that he had been careless and some spell of his had turned
against him, but then he looked over the burning houses at the river and he saw a strange ship sailing
there, a ship of great grace and beauty, that somehow seemed more a creation of nature than of man--and
he knew they were under attack. But who would attack Dhoz-Kam? There was no loot worth the effort.
It could not be Imrryrians...
 It could not be Elric.
 'It must not be Elric,' he growled. 'The Mirror. It must be turned upon the invaders.'
 'And upon yourself, brother?' Cymoril had risen unsteadily and leaned against a table. She was
smiling. 'You were too confident, Yyrkoon. Elric comes.'
 'Elric! Nonsense! Merely a few barbarian raiders from the interior. Once they are in the centre of
the city, we shall be able to use the Mirror of Memory upon them.' He ran to the trapdoor which led 
down into his house. 'Captain Valharik! Valharik where are you?'
 Valharik appeared in the room below. He was sweating. There was a blade in his gloved hand,
though he did not seem to have been in any fighting as yet.
 'Make the mirror ready, Valharik. Turn it upon the attackers.'
 'But, my lord, we might...'
 'Hurry! Do as I say. We'll soon have these barbarians added to our own strength--along with their
ships.'
 'Barbarians, my lord? Can barbarians command the fire elementals? These things we fight are flame
spirits. They cannot be slain any more than fire itself can be slain.'
 'Fire can be slain by water,' Prince Yyrkoon reminded his lieutenant. 'By water, Captain Valharik.
Have you forgotten?'
 'But, Prince Yyrkoon, we have tried to quench the spirits with water--and the water will not move
from our buckets. Some powerful sorcerer commands the invaders. He has the aid of the spirits of fire
and water.'
 'You are mad, Captain Valharik,' said Yyrkoon firmly. 'Mad. Prepare the mirror and let us have no
more of these stupidities.'
 Valharik wetted his dry lips. 'Aye, my lord.' He bowed his head and went to do his master's bidding.
 Again Yyrkoon went to the fence and looked through. There were men in the streets now, fighting
his own warriors, but smoke obscured his view, he could not make out the identities of any of the
invaders. 'Enjoy your petty victory,' Yyrkoon chuckled, 'for soon the mirror will take away your minds
and you will become my slaves.'
 'It is Elric,' said Cymoril quietly. She smiled. 'Elric comes to take vengeance on you, brother.'
 Yyrkoon sniggered. 'Think you? Think you? Well, should that be the case, he'll find me gone, for I
still have a means of evading him--and he'll find you in a condition which will not please him (though it
will cause him considerable anguish). But it is not Elric. It is some crude shaman from the steppes to the
east of here. He will soon be in my power.'
 Cymoril, too, was peering through the fence.
 'Elric,' she said. 'I can see his helm.'
 'What?' Yyrkoon pushed her aside. There, in the streets, Imrryrian fought Imrryrian, there was no
longer any doubt of that. Yyrkoon's men--Imrryrian, Oinish and Yurit--were being pushed back. And at
the head of the attacking Imrryrians could be seen a black dragon helm such as only one Melnibonean
wore. It was Elric's helm. And Elric's sword, that had once belonged to Earl Aubec of Malador, rose and
fell and was bright with blood which glistened in the morning sunshine.
 For a moment Yyrkoon was overwhelmed with despair. He groaned. 'Elric. Elric. Elric. Ah, how we
continue to underestimate each other. What curse is on us?'
 Cymoril had flung back her head and her face had come to life again. 'I said he would come,
brother!'
 Yyrkoon whirled on her. 'Aye--he has come--and the mirror will rob him of his brain and he will
turn into my slave, believing anything I care to put in his skull. This is even sweeter than I planned,
sister. Ha!' He looked up and then flung his arms across his eyes as he realised what he had done.
'Quickly--below--into the house--the mirror begins to turn.' There came a great creaking of gears and
pulleys and chains as the terrible Mirror of Memory began to focus on the streets below. 'It will be only a
little while before Elric has added himself and his men to my strength. What a splendid irony!' Yyrkoon
hurried his sister down the steps leading from the roof and he closed the trapdoor behind him. 'Elric
himself will help in the attack on Imrryr. He will destroy his own kind. He will oust himself from the
Ruby Throne!'
 'Do you not think that Elric has anticipated the threat of the Mirror of Memory, brother?' Cymoril
said with relish.
 'Anticipate it, aye--but resist it he cannot. He must see to fight. He must either be cut down or open 
his eyes. No man with eyes can be safe from the power of the mirror.' He glanced around the crudely
furnished room. 'Where is Valharik? Where is the cur?'
 Valharik came running in. 'The mirror is being turned, my lord, but it will affect our own men, too.
I fear...'
 'Then cease to fear. What if our own men are drawn under its influence? We can soon feed what
they need to know back into their brains--at the same time as we feed our defeated foes. You are too
nervous, Captain Valharik.'
 'But Elric leads them...'
 'And Elric's eyes are eyes--though they look like crimson stones. He will fare no better than his
men.'

 In the streets around Prince Yyrkoon's house Elric, Dyvim Tvar and their Imrryrians pushed on,
forcing back their demoralised opponents. The attackers had lost barely a man, whereas many Oinish and
Yurits lay dead in the streets, beside a few of their renegade Imrryrian commanders. The flame
elementals, whom Elric had summoned with some effort, were beginning to disperse, for it cost them
dear to spend so much time entirely within Elric's plane, but the necessary advantage had been gained
and there was now little question of who would win as a hundred or more houses blazed throughout the
city, igniting others and requiring attention from the defenders lest the whole squalid place burn down
about their ears. In the harbour, too, ships were burning.
 Dyvim Tvar was the first to notice the mirror beginning to swing into focus on the streets. He
pointed a warning finger, then turned, blowing on his war-horn and ordering forward the troops who, up
to now, had played no part in the fighting. 'Now you must lead us!' he cried, and he lowered his helm
over his face. The eyeholes of the helm had been blocked so that he could not see through.
 Slowly Elric lowered his own helm until he was in darkness. The sound of fighting continued
however, as the veterans who had sailed with them from Melnibone, set to work in their place and the
other troops fell back. The leading Imrryrians had not blocked their eyeholes.
 Elric prayed that the scheme would work.

 Yyrkoon, peeking cautiously through a chink in a heavy curtain, said querulously: 'Valharik? They
fight on. Why is that? Is not the mirror focussed?'
 'It should be, my lord.'
 'Then, see for yourself, the Imrryrians continue to forge through our defenders--and our men are
beginning to come under the influence of the mirror. What is wrong, Valharik? What is wrong?'
 Valharik drew air between his teeth and there was a certain admiration in his expression as he
looked upon the fighting Imrryrians.
 'They are blind,' he said. 'They fight by sound and touch and smell. They are blind, my lord emperor-
-and they lead Elric and his men whose helms are so designed they can see nothing.'
 'Blind?' Yyrkoon spoke almost pathetically, refusing to understand. 'Blind?'
 'Aye. Blind warriors--men wounded in earlier wars, but good fighters nonetheless. That is how Elric
defeats our mirror, my lord.'
 'Agh! No! No!' Yyrkoon beat heavily on his captain's back and the man shrank away. 'Elric is not
cunning. He is not cunning. Some powerful demon gives him these ideas.'
 'Perhaps, my lord. But are there demons more powerful than those who have aided you?'
 'No," said Yyrkoon. 'There are none. Oh, that I could summon some of them now. But I have
expended my powers in opening the Shade Gate. I should have anticipated... I could not anticipate... Oh
Elric! I shall yet destroy you, when the runeblades are mine!' Then Yyrkoon frowned. 'But how could he
have been prepared? What demon .... ? Unless he summoned Arioch himself? But he has not the power
to summon Arioch. I could not summon him..."
 And then, as if in reply, Yyrkoon heard Elric's battle song sounding from the nearby streets. And 
that song answered the question.
 'Arioch! Arioch! Blood and souls for my lord Arioch !'

 'Then I must have the runeblades. I must pass through the Shade Gate. There I still have allies--
supernatural allies who shall deal easily with Elric, if need be. But I need time...' Yyrkoon mumbled to
himself as he paced about the room. Valharik continued to watch the fighting.
 'They come closer,' said the captain.
 Cymoril smiled. 'Closer, Yyrkoon? Who is the fool now? Elric? Or you?'
 'Be still! I think. I think...' Yyrkoon fingered his lips.
 Then a light came into his eye and he looked cunningly at Cymoril for a second before turning his
attention to Captain Valharik.
 'Valharik, you must destroy the Mirror of Memory.'
 'Destroy it? But it is our only weapon, my lord?' 'Exactly--but is it not useless now?'
 'Aye.'
 'Destroy it and it will serve us again.' Yyrkoon flicked a long finger in the direction of the door. 'Go.
Destroy the mirror.'
 'But, Prince Yyrkoon--emperor, I mean--will that not have the effect of robbing us of our only
weapon?'
 'Do as I say, Valharik! Or perish!'
 'But how shall I destroy it, my lord?'
 'Your sword. You must climb the column behind the face of the mirror. Then, without looking into
the mirror itself, you must swing your sword against it and smash it. It will break easily. You know the
precautions I have had to take to make sure that it was not harmed.'
 'Is that all I must do?'
 'Aye. Then you are free from my service--you
 may escape or do whatever else you wish to do.'
 'Do we not sail against Melnibone?'
 'Of course not. I have devised another method of taking the Dragon Isle.'
 Valharik shrugged. His expression showed that he had never really believed Yyrkoon's assurances.
But what else had he to do but follow Yyrkoon, when fearful torture awaited him at Elric's hands? With
shoulders bowed, the captain slunk away to do his prince's work.
 'And now, Cymoril...' Yyrkoon grinned like a ferret as he reached out to grab his sister's soft
shoulders. 'Now to prepare you for your lover, Elric.'

 One of the blind warriors cried: 'They no longer resist us, my lord. They are limp and allow
themselves to be cut down where they stand. Why is this?'
  'The mirror has robbed them of their memories,' Elric called, turning his own blind head towards
the sound of the warrior's voice. 'You can lead us into a building now--where, with luck, we shall not
glimpse the mirror.'
 At last they stood within what appeared to Elric, as he lifted his helm, to be a warehouse of some
kind. Luckily it was large enough to hold their entire force and when they were all inside Elric had the
doors shut while they debated their next action.
 'We should find Yyrkoon,' Dyvim Tvar said. 'Let us interrogate one of those warriors...'
 'There'll be little point in that, my friend,' Elric reminded him. 'Their minds are gone. They'll
remember nothing at all. They do not at present remember even what they are, let alone who. Go to the
shutters yonder, where the mirror's influence cannot reach, and see if you can see the building most
likely to be occupied by my cousin.'
 Dyvim Tvar crossed swiftly to the shutters and looked cautiously out. 'Aye--there's a building larger
than the rest and I see some movement within, as if the surviving warriors were regrouping. It's likely 
that's Yyrkoon's stronghold. It should be easily taken.'
 Elric joined him. 'Aye. I agree with you. We'll find Yyrkoon there. But we must hurry, lest he
decides to slay Cymoril. We must work out the best means of reaching the place and instruct our blind
warriors as to how many streets, how many houses and so forth, we must pass.'
 'What is that strange sound?' One of the blind warriors raised his head. 'Like the distant ringing of a
gong.'
 'I hear it too,' said another blind man.
 And now Elric heard it. A sinister noise. It came from the air above them. It shivered through the
atmosphere.
 'The mirror!' Dyvim Tvar looked up. 'Has the mirror some property we did not anticipate?'
 'Possibly...' Elric tried to remember what Arioch had told him. But Arioch had been vague. He had
said nothing of this dreadful, mighty sound, this shattering clangour as if... 'He is breaking the mirror!' he
said. 'But why?' There was something more now, something brushing at his brain. As if the sound were,
itself, sentient.
 'Perhaps Yyrkoon is dead and his magic dies with him,' Dyvim Tvar began. And then he broke off
with a groan.
 The noise was louder, more intense, bringing sharp pain to his ears.
 And now Elric knew. He blocked his ears with his gauntleted hands. The memories in the mirror.
They were flooding into his mind. The mirror had been smashed and was releasing all the memories it
had stolen over the centuries--the aeons, perhaps. Many of those memories were not mortal. Many were
the memories of beasts and intelligent creatures which had existed even before Melnibone. And the
memories warred for a place in Elric's skull--in the skulls of all the Imrryrians--in the poor, tortured
skulls of the men outside whose pitiful screams could be heard rising from the streets--and in the skull of
Captain Valharik, the turncoat, as he lost his footing on the great column and fell with the shards from
the mirror to the ground far below.
 But Elric did not hear Captain Valharik scream and he did not hear Valharik's body crash first to a
roof-top and then into the street where it lay all broken beneath the broken mirror.
 Elric lay upon the stone floor of the warehouse and he writhed, as his comrades writhed, trying to
clear his head of a million memories that were not his own--of loves, of hatreds, of strange experiences
and ordinary experiences, of wars and journeys, of the faces of relatives who were not his relatives, of
men and women and children, of animals, of ships and cities; of fights, of lovemaking, of fears and
desires--and the memories fought each other for possession of his crowded skull, threatening to drive his
own memories (and thus his own character) from his head. And as Elric writhed upon the ground,
clutching at his ears, he spoke a word over and over again in an effort to cling to his own identity.
 'Elric. Elric. Elric.'
 And gradually, by an effort which he had experienced only once before when he had summoned
Arioch to the plane of the Earth, he managed to extinguish all those alien memories and assert his own
until, shaken and feeble, he lowered his hands from his ears and no longer shouted his own name. And
then he stood up and looked about him.
 More than two thirds of his men were dead, blind or otherwise. The big bosun was dead, his eyes
wide and staring, his lips frozen in a scream, his right eye-socket raw and bleeding from where he had
tried to drag his eye from it. All the corpses lay in unnatural positions, all had their eyes open (if they
had eyes) and many bore the marks of self-mutilation, while others had vomited and others had dashed
their brains against the wall. Dyvim Tvar was alive, but curled up in a corner, mumbling to himself and
Elric thought he might be mad. Some of the other survivors were, indeed, mad, but they were quiet, they
afforded no danger. Only five, including Elric, seemed to have resisted the alien memories and retained
their own sanity. It seemed to Elric, as he stumbled from corpse to corpse, that most of the men had had
their hearts fail.
 'Dyvim Tvar?' Elric put his hand on his friend's shoulder. 'Dyvim Tvar?'
 Dyvim Tvar took his head from his arm and looked into Elric's eyes. In Dyvim Tvar's own eyes was
the experience of a score of millennia and there was irony there, too. 'I live, Elric.'
 'Few of us live now.'

 A little later they left the warehouse, no longer needing to fear the mirror, and found that all the
streets were full of the dead who had received the mirror's memories. Stiff bodies reached out hands to
them. Dead lips formed silent pleas for help. Elric tried not to look at them as he pressed through them,
but his desire for vengeance upon his cousin was even stronger now.
 They reached the house. The door was open and the ground floor was crammed with corpses. There
was no sign of Prince Yyrkoon.
 Elric and Dyvim Tvar led the few Imrryrians who were still sane up the steps, past more imploring
corpses, until they reached the top floor of the house.
 And here they found Cymoril.
 She was lying upon a couch and she was naked. There were runes painted on her flesh and the runes
were, in themselves, obscene. Her eyelids were heavy and she did not at first recognise them. Elric
rushed to her side and cradled her body in his arms. The body was oddly cold.
 'He--he makes me--sleep...' said Cymoril. 'A sorcerous sleep--from which--only he can wake me...'
She gave a great yawn. 'I have stayed awake --this long--by an effort of--will--for Elric comes...'
 'Elric is here,' said her lover, softly. 'I am Elric, Cymoril.'
 'Elric?' She relaxed in his arms. 'You--you must find Yyrkoon--for only he can wake me...'
 'Where has he gone?' Elric's face had hardened. His crimson eyes were fierce. 'Where?'
 'To find the two black swords--the runeswords--of--our ancestors--Mournblade...'
 'And Stormbringer,' said Elric grimly. 'Those swords are cursed. But where has he gone, Cymoril?
How has he escaped us?'
 'Through--through--through the--Shade Gate--he conjured it--he made the most fearful pacts with
demons to go through... The--other--room . . .'
 Now Cymoril slept, but there seemed to be a certain peace on her face.
 Elric watched as Dyvim Tvar crossed the room, sword in hand, and flung the door open. A dreadful
stench came from the next room, which was in darkness. Something flickered on the far side.
 'Aye--that's sorcery, right enough,' said Elric. 'And Yyrkoon has thwarted me. He conjured the
Shade Gate and passed through it into some nether-world. Which one, I'll never know, for there is an
infinity of them. Oh, Arioch, I would give much to follow my cousin!'
 'Then follow him you shall,' said a sweet, sardonic voice in Elric's head.
 At first the albino thought it was a vestige of a memory still fighting for possession of his head, but
then he knew that Arioch spoke to him.
 'Dismiss your followers that I may speak with thee,' said Arioch.
 Elric hesitated. He wished to be alone--but not with Arioch. He wished to be with Cymoril, for
Cymoril was making him weep. Tears already flowed from his crimson eyes.
 'What I have to say could result in Cymoril being restored to her normal state,' said the voice. 'And,
moreover, it will help you defeat Yyrkoon and be revenged upon him. Indeed, it could make you the
most powerful mortal there has ever been.'
 Elric looked up at Dyvim Tvar. 'Would you and your men leave me alone for a few moments?'
 'Of course.' Dyvim Tvar led his men away and shut the door behind him.
 Arioch stood leaning against the same door. Again he had assumed the shape and poise of a
handsome youth. His smile was friendly and open and only the ancient eyes belied his appearance.
 'It is time to seek the black swords yourself, Elric,' said Arioch. 'Lest Yyrkoon reach them first. I
warn you of this--with the runeblades Yyrkoon will be so powerful he will be able to destroy half the
world without thinking of it. That is why your cousin risks the dangers of the world beyond the Shade
Gate. If Yyrkoon possesses those swords before you find them, it will mean the end of you, of Cymoril, 
of the Young Kingdoms and, quite possibly, the destruction of Melnibone, too. I will help you enter the
netherworld to seek for the twin runeswords.'
 Elric said musingly: 'I have often been warned of the dangers of seeking the swords--and the worse
dangers of owning them. I think I must consider another plan, my lord Arioch.'
 'There is no other plan. Yyrkoon desires the swords if you do not. With Mournblade in one hand
and Stormbringer in the other, he will be invincible, for the swords give their user power. Immense
power.' Arioch paused.
 'You must do as I say. It is to your advantage.' 'And to yours, Lord Arioch?'
 'Aye--to mine. I am not entirely selfless.'
 Elric shook his head. 'I am confused. There has been too much of the supernatural about this affair.
I suspect the gods of manipulating us...'
 'The gods serve only those who are willing to serve them. And the gods serve destiny, also.'
 'I like it not. To stop Yyrkoon is one thing, to assume his ambitions and take the swords myself--
that is another thing.'
 'It is your destiny.'
 'Cannot I change my destiny?'
 Arioch shook his head. 'No more than can I.'
 Elric stroked sleeping Cymoril's hair. 'I love her. She is all I desire.'
 'You shall not wake her if Yyrkoon finds the blades before you do.'
 'And how shall I find the blades?'
 'Enter the Shade Gate--I have kept it open, though Yyrkoon thinks it closed--then you must seek the
Tunnel Under the Marsh which leads to the Pulsing Cavern. In that chamber the runeswords are kept.
They have been kept there ever since your ancestors relinquished them...'
 'Why were they relinquished.'
 'Your ancestors lacked courage.'
 'Courage to face what?'
 'Themselves.'
 'You are cryptic, my lord Arioch.'
 'That is the way of the Lords of the Higher Worlds. Hurry. Even I cannot keep the Shade Gate open
long.'
 'Very well. I will go.'
 And Arioch vanished immediately.
 Elric called in a hoarse, cracking voice for Dyvim Tvar. Dyvim Tvar entered at once.
 'Elric? What has happened in here? Is it Cymoril? You look...'
 'I am going to follow Yyrkoon--alone, Dyvim Tvar.' You must make your way back to Melnibone
with those of our men who remain. Take Cymoril with you. If I do not return in reasonable time, you
must declare her empress. If she still sleeps, then you must rule as regent until she wakes.'
 Dyvim Tvar said softly: 'Do you know what you do, Elric?'
 Elric shook his head.
 'No, Dyvim Tvar, I do not.'
 He got to his feet and staggered towards the other room where the Shade Gate waited for him.



 BOOK THREE

 And now there is no turning back at all Elric's destiny has been forged and fixed as surely as the
hellswords were forged and fixed aeons before. Was there ever a point where he might have turned off
this road to despair, damnation and destruction? Or has he been doomed since before his birth? Doomed 
through a thousand incarnations to know little else but sadness and struggle, loneliness and remorse--
eternally the champion of some unknown cause?


1

Through the Shade Gate

 AND ELRIC STEPPED into a shadow and found himself in a world of shadows. He turned, but the
shadow through which he had entered now faded and was gone. Old Aubec's sword was in Elric's hand,
the black helm and the black armour were upon his body and only these were familiar, for the land was
dark and gloomy as if contained in a vast cave whose walls, though invisible, were oppressive and
tangible. And Elric regretted the hysteria, the weariness of brain, which had given him the impulse to
obey his patron demon Arioch and plunge through the Shade Gate. But regret was useless now, so he
forgot it.
 Yyrkoon was nowhere to be seen. Either Elric's cousin had had a steed awaiting him or else, more
likely, he had entered this world at a slightly different angle (for all the planes were said to turn about
each other) and was thus either nearer or farther from their mutual goal. The air was rich with brine--so
rich that Elric's nostrils felt as if they had been packed with salt--it was almost like walking under water
and just being able to breathe the water itself. Perhaps this explained why it was so difficult to see any
great distance in any direction, why there were so many shadows, why the sky was like a veil which hid
the roof of a cavern. Elric sheathed his sword, there being no evident danger present at that moment, and
turned slowly, trying to get some kind of bearing.
 It was possible that there were jagged mountains in what he judged the east, and perhaps a forest to
the west. Without sun, or stars, or moon, it was hard to gauge distance or direction. He stood on a rocky
plain over which whistled a cold and sluggish wind, which tugged at his cloak as if it wished to possess
it. There were a few stunted, leafless trees standing in a clump about a hundred paces away. It was all
that relieved the bleak plain, save for a large, shapeless slab of rock which stood a fair way beyond the
trees. It was a world which seemed to have been drained of all life, where Law and Chaos had once
battled and, in their conflict, destroyed all. Were there many planes such as this one? Elric wondered.
And for a moment he was filled with a dreadful presentiment concerning the fate of his own rich world.
He shook this mood off at once and began to walk towards the trees and the rock beyond.
 He reached the trees and passed them, and the touch of his cloak on a branch broke the brittle thing
which turned almost at once to ash which was scattered on the wind. Elric drew the cloak closer about
his body.
 As he approached the rock he became conscious of a sound which seemed to emanate from it. He
slowed his pace and put his hand upon the pommel of his sword.
 The noise continued--a small, rhythmic noise. Through the gloom Elric peered carefully at the rock,
trying to locate the source of the sound.
 And then the noise stopped and was replaced by another--a soft scuffle, a padding footfall, and then
silence. Elric took a pace backward and drew Aubec's sword. The first sound had been that of a man
sleeping. The second sound was that of a man waking and preparing himself either for attack or to
defend himself.
 Elric said: 'I am Elric of Melnibone. I am a stranger here.'
 And an arrow slid past his helm almost at the same moment as a bowstring sounded. Elric flung
himself to one side and sought about for cover, but there was no cover save the rock behind which the
archer hid.
 And now a voice came from behind the rock. It was a firm, rather bleak voice. It said:
 'That was not meant to harm you but to display my skill in case you considered harming me. I have 
had my fill of demons in this world and you look like the most dangerous demon of all, Whiteface.'
 'I am mortal,' said Elric, straightening up and deciding that if he must die it would be best to die
with some sort of dignity.
 'You spoke of Melnibone. I have heard of the place. An isle of demons.'
 'Then you have not heard enough of Melnibone. I am mortal as are all my folk. Only the ignorant
think us demons.'
 'I am not ignorant, my friend. I am a Warrior Priest of Phum, born to that caste and the inheritor of
all its knowledge and, until recently, the Lords of Chaos themselves were my patrons. Then I refused to
serve them longer and was exiled to this plane by them. Perhaps the same fate befell you, for the folk of
Melnibone serve Chaos do they not?'
 'Aye. And I know of Phum--it lies in the unmapped East--beyond the Weeping Waste, beyond the
Sighing Desert, beyond even Elwher. It is one of the oldest of the Young Kingdoms.'
 'All that is so--though I dispute that the East is unmapped, save by the savages of the West. So you
are, indeed, to share my exile, it seems.'
 'I am not exiled. I am upon a quest. When the quest is done, I shall return to my own world.'
 'Return, say you? That interests me, my pale friend. I had thought return impossible.'
 'Perhaps it is and I have been tricked. And if your own powers have not found you a way to another
plane, perhaps mine will not save me either.'
 'Powers? I have none since I relinquished my servitude to Chaos. Well, friend, do you intend to
fight me?'
 'There is only one upon this plane I would fight and it is not you, Warrior Priest of Phum.' Elric
sheathed his sword and at the same moment the speaker rose from behind the rock, replacing a scarletfletched
arrow in a scarlet quiver.
 'I am Rackhir,' said the man. 'Called the Red Archer for, as you see, I affect scarlet dress. It is a
habit of the Warrior Priests of Phum to choose but a single colour to wear. It is the only loyalty to
tradition I still possess.' He had on a scarlet jerkin, scarlet breeks, scarlet shoes and a scarlet cap with a
scarlet feather in it. His bow was scarlet and the pommel of his sword glowed ruby-red. His face, which
was aquiline and gaunt, as if carved from fleshless bone, was weather-beaten, and that was brown. He
was tall and he was thin, but muscles rippled on his arms and torso. There was irony in his eyes and
something of a smile upon his thin lips, though the face showed that it had been through much
experience, little of it pleasant.
 'An odd place to choose for a quest,' said the Red Archer, standing with hands on hips and looking
Elric up and down. 'But I'll strike a bargain with you if you're interested.'
 'If the bargain suits me, archer, I'll agree to it, for you seem to know more of this world than do I.'
 'Well--you must find something here and then leave, whereas I have nothing at all to do here and
wish to leave. If I help you in your quest, will you take me with you when you return to our own plane?'
 'That seems a fair bargain, but I cannot promise what I have no power to give. I will say only this--
if it is possible for me to take you back with me to our own plane, either before or after I have finished
my quest, I will do it.'
 'That is reasonable,' said Rackhir the Red Archer. 'Now--tell me what you seek.'
 'I seek two swords, forged millennia ago by immortals, used by my ancestors but then relinquished
by them and placed upon this plane. The swords are large and heavy and black and they have cryptic
runes carved into their blades. I was told that I would find them in the Pulsing Cavern which is reached
through the Tunnel Under the Marsh. Have you heard of either of these places?'
 'I have not. Nor have I heard of the two black swords.' Rackhir rubbed his bony chin. 'Though I
remember reading something in one of the Books of Phum and what I read disturbed me...'
 'The swords are legendary. Many books make some small reference to them--almost always
mysterious. There is said to be one tome which records the history of the swords and all who have used
them--and all who will use them in the future--a timeless book which contains all time. Some call it the 
Chronicle of the Black Sword and in it, it is said, men may read their whole destinies.'
 'I know nothing of that, either. It is not one of the Books of Phum. I fear, Comrade Elric, that we
shall have to venture to the City of Ameeron and ask your questions of the inhabitants there.'
 'There is a city upon this plane?'
 'Aye--a city. I stayed but a short time in it, preferring the wilderness. But with a friend, it might be
possible to bear the place a little longer.'
 'Why is Ameeron unsuited to your taste?'
 'Its citizens are not happy, indeed, they are a most depressed and depressing group, for they are all,
you see, exiles or refugees or travelers between the worlds who lost their way and never found it again.
No one lives in Ameeron by choice.'
 'A veritable City of the Damned.'
 'As the poet might remark, aye.' Rackhir offered Elric a sardonic wink. 'But I sometimes think all
cities are that.'
 'What is the nature of this plane where are, as far as I can tell, no planets, no moon, no sun. It has
something of the air of a great cavern.'
 'There is, indeed, a theory that it is a sphere buried in an infinity of rock. Others say that it lies in the
future of our own Earth--a future where the universe has died. I heard a thousand theories during the
short space of time I spend in the City of Ameeron. All, it seemed to me, were of equal value. All, it
seemed to me, could be correct. Why not? There are some who believe that everything is a Lie.
Conversely, everything could be the Truth.'
 It was Elric's turn to remark ironically: 'You are a philosopher, then, as well as an archer, friend
Rackhir of Phum?'
 Rackhir laughed. 'If you like! It is such thinking that weakened my loyalty to Chaos and led me to
this pass. I have heard that there is a city called Tanelorn which may sometimes be found on the shifting
shores of the Sighing Desert. If I ever return to our own world, Comrade Elric, I shall seek that city, for I
have heard that peace may be found there--that such debates as the nature of Truth are considered
meaningless. That men are content merely to exist in Tanelorn.'
 'I envy those who dwell in Tanelorn,' said Elric.
 Rackhir sniffed. 'Aye. But it would probably prove a disappointment, if found. Legends are best left
as legends and attempts to make them real are rarely successful. Come--yonder lies Ameeron and that,
sad to say, is more typical of most cities one comes across--on any plane.'
 The two tall men, both outcasts in their different ways, began to trudge through the gloom of that
desolate wasteland.


2

In the City of Ameeron

 THE CITY OF AMEERON came in sight and Elric had never seen such a place before. Ameeron
made Dhoz-Kam seem like the cleanest and most well-run settlement there could be. The city lay below
the plain of rocks, in a shallow valley over which hung perpetual smoke: a filthy, tattered cloak meant to
hide the place from the sight of men and gods.
 The buildings were mostly in a state of semi-ruin or else were wholly ruined and shacks and tents
erected in their place. The mixture of architectural styles--some familiar, some most alien--was such that
Elric was hard put to see one building which resembled another. There were shanties and castles,
cottages, towers and forts, plain, square villas and wooden huts heavy with carved ornamentation. Others
seemed merely piles of rock with a jagged opening at one end for a door. But none looked well--could
not have looked well in that landscape under that perpetually gloomy sky.
 Here and there red fires sputtered, adding to the smoke, and the smell as Elric and Rackhir reached
the outskirts was rich with a great variety of stinks.
 'Arrogance, rather than pride, is the paramount quality of most of Ameeron's residents,' said
Rackhir, wrinkling his hawklike nose. 'Where they have any qualities of character left at all.'
 Elric trudged through filth. Shadows scuttled amongst the close-packed buildings. 'Is there an inn,
perhaps, where we can enquire after the Tunnel Under the Marsh and its whereabouts?'
 'No inn. By and large the inhabitants keep themselves to themselves...'
 'A city square where folk meet?'
 'This city has no centre. Each resident or group of residents built their own dwelling where they felt
like it, or where there was space, and they come from all planes and all ages, thus the confusion, the
decay and the oldness of many of the places. Thus the filth, the hopelessness, the decadence of the
majority.'
 'How do they live?'
 'They live off each other, by and large. They trade with demons who occasionally visit Ameeron
from
 time to time...'
 'Demons?'
 'Aye. And the bravest hunt the rats which dwell in the caverns below the city.'
 'What demons are these?'
 'Just creatures, mainly minor minions of Chaos, who want something that the Ameeronese can
supply--a stolen soul or two, a baby, perhaps (though few are born here)--you can imagine what else, if
you've knowledge of what demons normally demand from sorcerers.'
 'Aye. I can imagine. So Chaos can come and go on this plane as it pleases.'
 'I'm not sure it's quite as easy. But it is certainly easier for the demons to travel back and forth here
than it would be for them to travel back and forth in our plane.'
 'Have you seen any of these demons?'
 'Aye. The usual bestial sort. Coarse, stupid and :powerful--many of them were once human before
electing to bargain with Chaos. Now they are mentally and physically warped into foul, demon shapes.'
 Elric found Rackhir's words not to his taste. 'Is that ever the fate of those who bargain with Chaos?'
he said.
 'You should know, if you come from Melnibone. I know that in Phum it is rarely the case. But it
seems that the higher the stakes the subtler are the changes a man undergoes when Chaos agrees to trade
with him.'
 Elric sighed. 'Where shall we enquire of our Tunnel Under the Marsh?'
 'There was an old man...' Rackhir began, and
 then a grunt behind him made him pause.
 Another grunt.
 A face with tusks in it emerged from a patch of darkness formed by a fallen slab of masonry. The
face grunted again.
 'Who are you?' said Elric, his sword-hand ready.
 'Pig,' said the face with tusks in it. Elric was not certain whether he was being insulted or whether
the creature was describing himself.
 'Pig.'
 Two more faces with tusks in them came out of the patch of darkness. 'Pig,' said one.
 'Pig,' said another.
 'Snake,' said a voice behind Elric and Rackhir. Elric turned while Rackhir continued to watch the
pigs. A tall youth stood there. Where his head would have been sprouted the bodies of about fifteen goodsized
snakes. The head of each snake glared at Elric. The tongues flickered and they all opened their
mouths at exactly the same moment to say again:
 'Snake.'
 'Thing,' said another voice. Elric glanced in that direction, gasped, drew his sword and felt nausea
sweep through him.
 Then Pigs, Snake and Thing were upon them.
 Rackhir took one Pig before it could move three paces. His bow was off his back and strung and a
red-fletched arrow nocked and shot, all in a second. He had time to shoot one more Pig and then drop his
bow to draw his sword. Back to back he and Elric prepared to defend themselves against the demons'
attack. Snake was bad enough, with its fifteen darting heads hissing and snapping with teeth which
dripped venom, but Thing kept changing its form--first an arm would emerge, then a face would appear
from the shapeless, heaving flesh which shuffled implacably closer.
 'Thing!' it shouted. Two swords slashed at Elric who was dealing with the last Pig and missed his
stroke so that instead of running the Pig through the heart, he took him in a lung. Pig staggered backward
and slumped to the ground in a pool of muck, He crawled for a moment, but then collapsed. Thing had
produced a spear and Elric barely managed to deflect the cast with the flat of his sword. Now Rackhir
was engaged with Snake and the two demons closed on the men, eager to make a finish of them. Half the
heads of Snake lay writhing on the ground and Elric had managed to slice one hand off Thing, but the
demon still seemed to have three other hands ready. It seemed to be created not from one creature but
from several. Elric wondered if, through his bargaining with Arioch, this would ultimately be his fate, to
be turned into a demon--a formless monster. But wasn't he already something of a monster? Didn't folk
already mistake him for a demon?
 These thoughts gave him strength. He yelled as he fought. 'Elric!'
 And: 'Thing!' replied his adversary, also eager to assert what he regarded as the essence of his
being.
 Another hand flew off as Aubec's sword bit into it. Another javelin jabbed out and was knocked
aside; another sword appeared and came down on Elric's helm with a force which dazed him and sent
him reeling back against Rackhir who missed his thrust at Snake and was almost bitten by four of the
heads. Elric chopped at the arm and the tentacle which held the sword and saw them part from the body
but then become reabsorbed again. The nausea returned. Elric thrust his sword into the mass and the
mass screamed: 'Thing! Thing! Thing!'
 Elric thrust again and four swords and two spears waved and clashed and tried to deflect Aubec's
blade.
 'Thing!'
 'This is Yyrkoon's work,' said Elric, 'without a doubt. He has heard that I have followed him and
seeks to stop us with his demon allies.' He gritted his teeth and spoke through them. 'Unless one of these
is Yyrkoon himself! Are you my cousin Yyrkoon, Thing?'
 'Thing...' The voice was almost pathetic. The weapons waved and clashed but they no longer darted
so fiercely at Elric.
 'Or are you some other old, familiar friend?'
 'Thing...'
 Elric stabbed again and again into the mass. Thick, reeking blood spurted and fell upon his armour.
Elric could not understand why it had become so easy to take the attack to the demon.
 'Now!' shouted a voice from above Elric's head. 'Quickly!'
 Elric glanced up and saw a red face, a white beard, a waving arm. 'Don't look at me you fool! Now--
strike!'
 And Elric put his two hands above his sword hilt and drove the blade deep into the shapeless
creature which moaned and wept and said in a small whisper
 'Frank...' before it died.
 Rackhir thrust at the same moment and his blade went under the remaining snake heads and
plunged into the chest and thence into the heart of the youth-body and his demon died, too.
 The white-haired man came clambering down from the ruined archway on which he had been
perched. He was laughing. 'Niun's sorcery still has some effect, even here, eh? I heard the tall one call his
demon friends and instruct them to set upon you. It did not seem fair to me that five should attack two--
so I sat upon that wall and I drew the many-armed demon's strength out of it. I still can. I still can. And
now I have his strength (or a fair part of it) and feel considerably better than I have done for many a
moon (if such a thing exists).'
 'It said "Frank",' said Elric frowning. 'Was that a name, do you think? Its name before?'
 'Perhaps,' said old Niun, 'perhaps. Poor creature. But still, it is dead now. You are not of Ameeron,
you two--though I've seen you here before, red one.'
 'And I've seen you,' said Rackhir with a smile. He wiped Snake's blood from his blade, using one of
Snake's heads for the purpose. 'You are Niun Who Knew All.'
 'Aye. Who Knew All but who now knows very little. Soon it will be over, when I have forgotten
everything. Then! may return from this awful exile. It is the pact I made with Orland of the Staff. I was a
fool who wished to know everything and my curiosity led me into an adventure concerning this Orland.
Orland showed me the error of my ways and sent me here to forget. Sadly, as you noticed, I still
remember some of my powers and my knowledge from time to time. I know you seek the Black Swords.
I know you are Elric of Melnibone I know what will become of you.'
 'You know my destiny?' said Elric eagerly. 'Tell me what it is Niun Who Knew All!'
 Niun opened his mouth as if to speak but then firmly shut it again. 'No,' he said. 'I have forgotten.'
 'No!' Elric made as if to seize the old man. 'No!
 You remember! I can see that you remember!'
 'I have forgotten.' Niun lowered his head.
 Rackhir took hold of Elric's arm. 'He has forgotten, Elric.'
 Elric nodded. 'Very well.' Then he said, 'But have you remembered where lies the Tunnel Under the
Marsh?'
 'Yes. It is only a short distance from Ameeron, the Marsh itself. You go that way. Then you look for
a monument in the shape of an eagle carved in black marble. At the base of the monument is the entrance
to the tunnel.' Niun repeated this information parrot-fashion and when he looked up his face was clearer.
'What did I just tell you?'
 Elric said: 'You gave us instructions on how to reach the entrance to the Tunnel Under the Marsh.'
 'Did I?' Niun clapped his old hands. 'Splendid. I have forgotten that now, too. Who are you?'
 'We are best forgotten,' said Rackhir with a gentle smile. 'Farewell, Niun and thanks.'
 'Thanks for what?'
 'Both for remembering and for forgetting.'
 They walked on through the miserable City of Ameeron, away from the happy old sorcerer, sighting
the odd face staring at them from a doorway or a window, doing their best to breathe as little of the foul
air as possible.
 'I think perhaps that I envy Niun alone of all the inhabitants of this desolate place,' said Rackhir.
 'I pity him,' said Elric.
 'Why so?'
 'It occurs to me that when he has forgotten everything, he may well forget that he is allowed to
leave Ameeron.'
 Rackhir laughed and slapped the albino upon his black armoured back. 'You are a gloomy comrade,
friend Elric. Are all your thoughts so hopeless?'
 'They tend in that direction, I fear,' said Elric with a shadow of a smile.


3
 
The Tunnel Under the Marsh

 AND ON THEY travelled through that sad and murky world until at last they came to the marsh.
 The marsh was black. Black spiky vegetation grew in clumps here and there upon it. It was cold and
it was dank; a dark mist swirled close to the surface and through the mist sometimes darted low shapes.
From the mist rose a solid black object which could only be the monument described by Niun.
 'The monument,' said Rackhir, stopping and leaning on his bow. 'It's well out into the marsh and
there's no evident pathway leading to it. Is this a problem, do you think, Comrade Elric?'
 Elric waded cautiously into the edge of the marsh. He felt the cold ooze drag at his feet. He stepped
back with some difficulty.
 'There must be a path,' said Rackhir, fingering his bony nose. 'Else how would your cousin cross?'
 Elric looked over his shoulder at the Red Archer and he shrugged. 'Who knows? He could be
travelling with sorcerous companions who have no difficulty where marshes are concerned.'
 Suddenly Elric found himself sitting down upon the damp rock. The stink of brine from the marsh
seemed for a moment to have overwhelmed him. He was feeling weak. The effectiveness of his drugs,
last taken just as he stepped through the Shade Gate, was beginning to fade.
 Rackhir came and stood by the albino. He smiled with a certain amount of bantering sympathy.
'Well, Sir Sorcerer, cannot you summon similar aid?'
 Elric shook his head. 'I know little that is practical concerning the raising of small demons. Yyrkoon
has all his grimoires, his favourite spells, his introductions to the demon worlds. We shall have to find a
path of the ordinary kind if we wish to reach yonder monument, Warrior Priest of Phum.'
 The Warrior Priest of Phum drew a red kerchief from within his tunic and blew his nose for some
time. When he had finished he put down a hand, helped Elric to his feet, and began to walk along the rim
of the marsh, keeping the black monument ever in sight.
 It was some time later that they found a path at last and it was not a natural path but a slab of black
marble extending out into the gloom of the mire, slippery to the feet and itself covered with a film of
ooze.
 'I would almost suspect this of being a false path--a lure to take us to our death,' said Rackhir as he
and Elric stood and looked at the long slab, 'but what have we to lose now?'
 'Come,' said Elric, setting foot on the slab and beginning to make his cautious way along it. In his
hand he now held a torch of sorts, a bundle of sputtering reeds which gave off an unpleasant yellow light
and a considerable amount of greenish smoke, but it was better than nothing.
 Rackhir, testing each footstep with his unstrung bow-stave, followed behind, whistling a small,
complicated tune as he went along. Another of his race would have recognised the tune as the Song of
the Son of the Hero of the High Hell who is about to Sacrifice his Life, a popular melody in Phum,
particularly amongst the caste of the Warrior Priest.
 Elric found the tune irritating and distracting, but he said nothing, for he concentrated every
fragment of his attention on keeping his balance upon the slippery surface of the slab, which now
appeared to rock slightly, as if it floated on the surface of the marsh.
 And now they were halfway to the monument whose shape could be clearly distinguished: A great
eagle with spread wings and a savage beak and claws extended for the kill. An eagle in the same black
marble as the slab on which they tried to keep their balance. And Elric was reminded of a tomb. Had
some ancient hero been buried here? Or had the tomb been built to house the Black Swords--imprison
them so that they might never enter the world of men again and steal men's souls?
 The slab rocked more violently. Elric tried to remain upright but swayed first on one foot and then
the other, the brand waving crazily. Both feet slid from under him and he went flying into the marsh
 and was instantly buried up to his knees.
 He began to sink.
 Somehow he had managed to keep his grip on the brand and by its light he could see the red-clad 
archer peering forward.
 'Elric?'
 'I'm here, Rackhir.'
 'You're sinking?'
 'The marsh seems intent on swallowing me, aye.'
 'Can you lie flat?'
 'I can lie forward, but my legs are trapped.' Elric tried to move his body in the ooze which pressed
against it. Something rushed past him in front of his face, giving voice to a kind of muted gibbering.
Elric did his best to control the fear which welled up in him. 'I think you must give me up, friend
Rackhir.'
 'What? And lose my means of getting out of this world? You must think me more selfless than I am,
Comrade Elric. Here...' Rackhir carefully lowered himself to the slab and reached out his arm towards
Elric. Both men were now covered in clinging slime; both shivered with cold. Rackhir stretched and
stretched and Elric leaned forward as far as he could and tried to reach the hand, but it was impossible.
And every second dragged him deeper into the stinking filth of the marsh.
 Then Rackhir took up his bow-stave and pushed that out.
 'Grab the bow, Elric. Can you?'
 Leaning forward and stretching every bone and muscle in his body, Elric just managed to get a grip
on the bow-stave.
 'Now, I must--Ah!' Rackhir, pulling at the bow, found his own feet slipping and the slab beginning
to rock quite wildly. He flung out one arm to grab the far lip of the slab and with his other hand kept a
grip on the bow, 'Hurry, Elric! Hurry!'
 Elric began painfully to pull himself from the ooze. The slab still rocked crazily and Rackhir's
hawklike face was almost as pale as Elric's own as he desperately strove to keep his hold on both slab
and bow. And then Elric, all soaked in mire, managed to reach the slab and crawl onto it, the brand still
sputtering in his hand, and lie there gasping and gasping and gasping.
 Rackhir, too, was short of breath, but he laughed. 'What a fish I've caught!' he said. 'The biggest yet,
I'd wager!'
 'I am grateful to you, Rackhir the Red Archer. I am grateful, Warrior Priest of Phum. I owe you my
life,' said Elric after a while. 'And I swear that whether I'm successful in my quest or not I'll use all my
powers to see you through the Shade Gate and back into the world from which we have both come.'
 Rackhir said quietly: 'You are a man, Elric of Melnibone. That is why I saved you. There are few
men in any world.' He shrugged and grinned. 'Now I suggest we continue towards yonder monument on
our knees. Undignified it might be, but safer it is also. And it is but a short way to crawl.'
 Elric agreed.
 Not much more time had passed in that timeless darkness before they had reached a little mossgrown
island on which stood the Monument of the Eagle, huge and heavy and towering above them into
the greater gloom which was either the sky or the roof of the cavern. And at the base of the plinth they
saw a low doorway. And the doorway was open.
 'A trap?' mused Rackhir.
 'Or does Yyrkoon assume us perished in Ameeron?' said Elric, wiping himself free of slime as best
he could. He sighed. 'Let's enter and be done with it.'
 And so they entered.
 They found themselves in a small room. Elric cast the faint light of a brand about the place and saw
another doorway. The rest of the room was featureless-each wall made of the same faintly glistening
black marble. The room was filled with silence.
 Neither man spoke. Both walked unfalteringly towards the next doorway and, when they found
steps, began to descend the steps, which wound down and down into total darkness.
 For a long time they descended, still without speaking, until eventually they reached the bottom and 
saw before them the entrance to a narrow tunnel which was irregularly shaped so that it seemed more the
work of nature than of some intelligence. Moisture dripped from the roof of the tunnel and fell with the
regularity of heartbeats to the floor, seeming to echo a deeper sound, far, far away, emanating from
somewhere in the tunnel itself.
 Elric heard Rackhir clear his throat.
 'This is without doubt a tunnel,' said the Red Archer, 'and it, unquestionably leads under the marsh.'
 Elric felt that Rackhir shared his reluctance to enter the tunnel. He stood with the guttering brand
held high, listening to the sound of the drops falling to the floor of the tunnel, trying to recognise that
other sound which came so faintly from the depths.
 And then he forced himself forward, almost running into the tunnel, his ears filled with a sudden
roaring which might have come from within his head or from some other source in the tunnel. He heard
Rackhir's footfalls behind him. He drew his sword, the sword of the dead hero Aubec, and he heard the
hissing of his own breath echo from the walls of the tunnel which was now alive with sounds of every
sort.
 Elric shuddered, but he did not pause.
 The tunnel was warm. The floor felt spongy beneath his feet, the smell of brine persisted. And now
he could see that the walls of the tunnel were smoother, that they seemed to shiver with quick, regular
movement. He heard Rackhir gasp behind him as the archer, too, noted the peculiar nature of the tunnel.
 'It's like flesh,' murmured the Warrior Priest of Phum. 'Like flesh.'
 Elric could not bring himself to reply. All his attention was required to force himself forward. He
was consumed by terror. His whole body shook. He sweated and his legs threatened to buckle under him.
His grip was so weak that he could barely keep his sword from falling to the floor. And there were hints
of something in his memory, something which his brain refused to consider. Had he been here before?
His trembling increased. His stomach turned. But he still stumbled on, the brand held before him.
 And now the soft, steady thrumming sound grew louder and he saw ahead a small, almost circular
aperture at the very end of the tunnel. He stopped, swaying.
 'The tunnel ends,' whispered Rackhir. 'There is no way through.'
 The small aperture was pulsing with a swift, strong beat.
 'The Pulsing Cavern,' Elric whispered. 'That is what we should find at the end of the Tunnel Under
the Marsh. That must be the entrance, Rackhir.'
 'It is too small for a man to enter, Elric,' said
 Rackhir reasonably.
 'No...'
 Elric stumbled forward until he stood close to the opening. He sheathed his sword. He handed the
brand to Rackhir and then, before the Warrior Priest of Phum could stop him, he had flung himself
headfirst through the gap, wriggling his body through--and the walls of the aperture parted for him and
then closed behind him, leaving Rackhir on the other side.
 Elric got slowly to his feet. A faint, pinkish light now came from the walls and ahead of him was
another entrance, slightly larger than the other through which he had just come. The air was warm and
thick and salty. It almost stifled him. His head throbbed and his body ached and he could barely act or
think, save to force himself onward. On faltering legs he flung himself towards the next entrance as the
great, muffled pulsing sounded louder and louder in his ears.
 'Elric!'
 Rackhir stood behind him, pale and sweating. He had abandoned the brand and followed Elric
through.
 Elric licked dry lips and tried to speak.
 Rackhir came closer.
 Elric said thickly: 'Rackhir. You should not be here.'
 'I said I would help.' 
 'Aye, but . . .'
 'Then help I shall.'
 Elric had no strength for arguing, so he nodded and with his hands forced back the soft walls of the
second aperture and saw that it led into a cavern whose round wall quivered to a steady pulsing. And in
the centre of the cavern, hanging in the air without any support at all were two swords. Two identical
swords, huge and fine and black.
 And standing beneath the swords, his expression gloating and greedy, stood Prince Yyrkoon of
Melnibone, reaching up for them, his lips moving but no words escaping from him. And Elric himself
was able to voice but one word as he climbed through and stood upon that shuddering floor. 'No,' he
said.
 Yyrkoon heard the word. He turned with terror in his face. He snarled when he saw Elric and then
he, too, voiced a word which was at once a scream of outrage.
 'No!'
 With an effort Elric dragged Aubec's blade from its scabbard. But it seemed too heavy to hold
upright, it tugged his arm so that it rested on the floor, his arm hanging straight at his side. Elric drew
deep breaths of heavy air into his lungs. His vision was dimming. Yyrkoon had become a shadow. Only
the two black swords, standing still and cool in the very centre of the circular chamber, were in focus.
Elric sensed Rackhir enter the chamber and stand beside him.
 'Yyrkoon,' said Elric at last, 'those swords are mine.'
 Yyrkoon smiled and reached up towards the blades. A peculiar moaning sound seemed to issue
from them. A faint, black radiance seemed to emanate from them. Elric saw the runes carved into them
and he was afraid.
 Rackhir fitted an arrow to his bow. He drew the string back to his shoulder, sighting along the arrow
at Prince Yyrkoon. 'If he must die, Elric, tell me.'
 'Slay him,' said Elric.
 And Rackhir released the string.
 But the arrow moved very slowly through the air and then hung halfway between the archer and his
intended target.
 Yyrkoon turned, a ghastly grin on his face. 'Mortal weapons are useless here,' he said.
 Elric said to Rackhir, 'He must be right. And your life is in danger, Rackhir. Go...'
 Rackhir gave him a puzzled look. 'No, I must stay here and help you...'
 Elric shook his head. 'You cannot help, you will only die if you stay. Go.'
 Reluctantly the Red Archer unstrung his bow, glanced suspiciously up at the two black swords, then
squeezed his way through the doorway and was gone.
 'Now, Yyrkoon,' said Elric, letting Aubec's sword fall to the floor. 'We must settle this, you and I.'


4

Two Black Swords

 AND THEN THE runeblades Stormbringer and Mournblade were gone from where they had hung
so long.
 And Stormbringer had settled into Elric's right hand. And Mournblade lay in Prince Yyrkoon's right
hand.
 And the two men stood on opposite sides of the Pulsing Cavern and regarded first each other and
then the swords they held.
 The swords were singing. Their voices were faint but could be heard quite plainly. Elric lifted the
huge blade easily and turned it this way and that, admiring its alien beauty.
 'Stormbringer,' he said.
 And then he felt afraid.
 It was suddenly as if he had been born again and that this runesword was born with him. It was as if
they had never been separate.
 'Stormbringer.'
 And the sword moaned sweetly and settled even more smoothly into his grasp.
 'Stormbringer!' yelled Elric and he leapt at his cousin.
 'Stormbringer!'
 And he was full of fear--so full of fear. And the fear brought a wild kind of delight--a demonic need
to fight and kill his cousin, to sink the blade deep into Yyrkoon's heart. To take vengeance. To spill
blood. To send a soul to hell.
 And now Prince Yyrkoon's cry could be heard above the thrum of the sword-voices, the drumming
 of the pulse of the cavern.
 'Mournblade!'
 And Mournblade came up to meet Stormbringer's blow and turn that blow and thrust back at Elric
who swayed aside and brought Stormbringer round and down in a sidestroke which knocked Yyrkoon
and Mournblade backward for an instant. But Stormbringer's next thrust was met again. And the next
thrust was met. And the next. If the swordsmen were evenly matched, then so were the blades, which
seemed possessed of their own wills, though they performed the wills of their wielders.
 And the clang of the metal upon metal turned into a wild, metallic song which the swords sang. A
joyful song as if they were glad at last to be back to battling, though they battled each other.
 And Elric barely saw his cousin, Prince Yyrkoon, at all, save for an occasional flash of his dark,
wild face. Elric's attention was given entirely to the two black swords, for it seemed that the swords
fought with the life of one of the swordsmen as a prize (or perhaps the lives of both, thought Elric) and
that the rivalry between Elric and Yyrkoon was nothing compared with the brotherly rivalry between the
swords who seemed full of pleasure at the chance to engage again after many millennia.
 And this observation, as he fought--and fought for his soul as well as his life--gave Elric pause to
consider his hatred of Yyrkoon.
 Kill Yyrkoon he would, but not at the will of another power. Not to give sport to these alien swords.
 Mournblade's point darted at his eyes and Stormbringer rose to deflect the thrust once more.
 Elric no longer fought his cousin. He fought the will of the two black swords.
 Stormbringer dashed for Yyrkoon's momentarily undefended throat. Elric clung to the sword and
dragged it back, sparing his cousin's life. Stormbringer whined almost petulantly, like a dog stopped
from biting an intruder.
 And Elric spoke through clenched teeth. 'I'll not be your puppet, runeblade. If we must be united, let
it be upon a proper understanding.'
 The sword seemed to hesitate, to drop its guard, and Elric was hard put to defend himself against
the whirling attack of Mournblade which, in turn, seemed to sense its advantage.
 Elric felt fresh energy pour up his right arm and into his body. This was what the sword could do.
With it, he needed no drugs, would never be Weak again. In battle he would triumph. At peace, he could
rule with pride. When he travelled, it could be alone and without fear. It was as if the sword reminded
him of all these things, even as it returned Mournblade's attack.
 And what must the sword have in return?
 Elric knew. The sword told him, without words of any sort. Stormbringer needed to fight, for that
was its reason for existence. Stormbringer needed to kill, for that was its source of energy, the lives and
the souls of men, demons--even gods.
 And Elric hesitated, even as his cousin gave a huge, cackling yell and dashed at him so that
Mournblade glanced off his helm and he was flung backwards and down and saw Yyrkoon gripping his
moaning black sword in both hands to plunge the runeblade into Elric's body.
 And Elric knew he would do anything to resist that fate--for his soul to be drawn into Mournblade
and his strength to feed Prince Yyrkoon's strength. And he rolled aside, very quickly, and got to one knee
and turned and lifted Stormbringer with one gauntleted hand upon the blade and the other upon the hilt to
take the great blow Prince Yyrkoon brought upon it. And the two black swords shrieked as if in pain, and
they shivered, and black radiance poured from them as blood might pour from a man pierced by many
arrows. And Elric was driven, still on his knees, away from the radiance, gasping and sighing and
peering here and there for sight of Yyrkoon who had disappeared.
 And Elric knew that Stormbringer spoke to him again. If Elric did not wish to die by Mournblade,
then Elric must accept the bargain which the Black Sword offered.
 'He must not die!' said Elric. 'I will not slay him to make sport for you!'
 And through the black radiance ran Yyrkoon, snarling and snapping and whirling his runesword.
 Again Stormbringer darted through an opening, and again Elric made the blade pull back and
Yyrkoon was only grazed.
 Stormbringer writhed in Elric's hands.
 Elric said: 'You shall not be my master.'
 And Stormbringer seemed to understand and become quieter, as if reconciled. And Elric laughed,
thinking that he now controlled the runesword and that from now on the blade would do his bidding.
 'We shall disarm Yyrkoon,' said Elric. 'We shall not kill him.'
 Elric rose to his feet.
 Stormbringer moved with all the speed of a needle-thin rapier. It feinted, it parried, it thrust.
Yyrkoon, who had been grinning in triumph, snarled and staggered back, the grin dropping from his
sullen features.
 Stormbringer now worked for Elric. It made the moves that Elric wished to make. Both Yyrkoon
and Mournblade seemed disconcerted by this turn of events. Mournblade shouted as if in astonishment at
its brother's behaviour. Elric struck at Yyrkoon's sword-arm, pierced cloth--pierced flesh--pierced sinew--
pierced bone. Blood came, soaking Yyrkoon's arm and dripping down onto the hilt of the sword. The
blood was slippery. It weakened Yyrkoon's grip on his runesword. He took it in both hands, but he was
unable to hold it firmly.
 Elric, too, took Stormbringer in both hands. Unearthly strength surged through him. With a gigantic
blow he dashed Stormbringer against Mournblade where blade met hilt. The runesword few from
Yyrkoon's grasp. It sped across the Pulsing Cavern.
 Elric smiled. He had defeated his own sword's will and, in turn, had defeated the brother sword.
 Mournblade fell against the wall of the Pulsing Cavern and for a moment was still.
 A groan then seemed to escape the defeated runesword. A high-pitched shriek filled the Pulsing
Cavern. Blackness flooded over the eery pink light and extinguished it.
 When the light returned Elric saw that a scabbard lay at his feet. The scabbard was black and of the
same alien craftsmanship as the runesword. Elric saw Yyrkoon. The prince was on his knees and he was
sobbing, his eyes darting about the Pulsing Cavern seeking Mournblade, looking at Elric with fright as if
he knew he must now be slain.
 'Mournblade?' Yyrkoon said hopelessly. He knew he was to die.
 Mournblade had vanished from the Pulsing Cavern.
 'Your sword is gone,' said Elric quietly.
 Yyrkoon whimpered and tried to crawl towards the entrance of the cavern. But the entrance had
shrunk to the size of a small coin. Yyrkoon wept.
 Stormbringer trembled, as if thirsty for Yyrkoon's soul. Elric stooped.
 Yyrkoon began to speak rapidly. 'Do not slay me, Elric--not with that runeblade. I will do anything
you wish. I will die in any other way.'
 Elric said: 'We are victims, cousin, of a conspiracy--a game played by gods, demons and sentient
swords. They wish one of us dead. I suspect they wish you dead more than they wish me dead. And that 
is the reason why I shall not slay you here.' He picked up the scabbard. He forced Stormbringer into it
and at once the sword was quiet. Elric took off his old scabbard and looked around for Aubec's sword,
but that, too, was gone. He dropped the old scabbard and hooked the new one to his belt. He rested his
left hand upon the pommel of Stormbringer and he looked not without sympathy upon the creature that
was his cousin.
 'You are a worm, Yyrkoon. But is that your fault?'
 Yyrkoon gave him a puzzled glance.
 'I wonder, if you had all your desire, would you cease to be a worm, cousin?'
 Yyrkoon raised himself to his knees. A little hope began to show in his eyes.
 Elric smiled and drew a deep breath. 'We shall see,' he said. 'You must agree to wake Cymoril from
her sorcerous slumber.'
 'You have humbled me, Elric,' said Yyrkoon in a small, pitiful voice. 'I will wake her. Or would...'
 'Can you not undo your spell?'
 'We cannot escape from the Pulsing Cavern. It is
 past the time...'
 'What's this?'
 'I did not think you would follow me. And then I thought I would easily finish you. And now it is
past the time. One can keep the entrance open for only a little while. It will admit anyone who cares to
enter the Pulsing Cavern, but it will let no-one out after the power of the spell dies. I gave much to know
that spell.'
 'You have given too much for everything,' said Elric. He went to the entrance and peered through.
Rackhir waited on the other side. The Red Archer had an anxious expression. Elric said: 'Warrior Priest
of Phum, it seems that my cousin and I are trapped in here. The entrance will not part for us.' Elric tested
the warm, moist stuff of the wall. It would not open more than a tiny fraction. 'It seems that you can join
us or else go back. If you do join us, you share our fate.'
 'It is not much of a fate if I go back,' said Rackhir. 'What chances have you?'
 'One,' said Elric. 'I can invoke my patron.'
 'A Lord of Chaos?' Rackhir made a wry face. 'Exactly,' said Elric. 'I speak of Arioch.'.
 'Arioch, eh? Well, he does not care for renegades from Phum.'
 'What do you choose to do?'
 Rackhir stepped forward. Elric stepped back. Through the opening came Rackhir's head, followed
by his shoulders, followed by the rest of him. The entrance closed again immediately. Rackhir stood up
and untangled the string of his bow from the stave, smoothing it. 'I agreed to share your fate--to gamble
all on escaping from this plane,' said the Red Archer. He looked surprised when he saw Yyrkoon. 'Your
enemy is still alive?'
 'Aye.'
 'You are merciful indeed!'
 'Perhaps. Or obstinate. I would not slay him merely because some supernatural agency used him as
a pawn, to be killed if I should win. The Lords of the higher Worlds do not as yet control me completelynor
will they if I have any power at all to resist them.'
 Rackhir grinned. 'I share your view--though I'm not optimistic about its realism. I see you have one
of those black swords at your belt. Will that not hack a way through the cavern?'
 'No,' said Yyrkoon from his place against the wall. 'Nothing can harm the stuff of the Pulsing
Cavern.'
 'I'll believe you,' said Elric, 'for I do not intend to draw this new sword of mine often. I must learn
how to control it first.'
 'So Arioch must be summoned.' Rackhir sighed.
 ' If that is possible,' said Elric.
 'He will doubtless destroy me,' said Rackhir, looking to Elric in the hope that the albino would deny 
this statement.
 Elric looked grave. 'I might be able to strike a bargain with him. It will also test something.'
 Elric turned his back on Rackhir and on Yyrkoon. He adjusted his mind. He sent it out through vast
spaces and complicated mazes. And he cried:
 'Arioch! Arioch! Aid me, Arioch!'
 He had a sense of something listening to him. 'Arioch!'
 Something shifted in the places where his mind went.
 'Arioch...'
 And Arioch heard him. He knew it was Arioch.
 Rackhir gave a horrified yell. Yyrkoon screamed. Elric turned and saw that something disgusting
had appeared near the far wall. It was black and it was foul and it slobbered and its shape was intolerably
alien. Was this Arioch? How could it be? Arioch was beautiful. But perhaps, thought Elric, this was
Arioch's true shape. Upon this plane, in this peculiar cavern, Arioch could not deceive those who looked
upon him.
 But then the shape had disappeared and a beautiful youth with ancient eyes stood looking at the
three mortals.
 'You have won the sword, Elric,' said Arioch, ignoring the others. 'I congratulate you. And you have
spared your cousin's life. Why so?'
 'More than one reason,' said Elric. 'But let us say he must remain alive in order to wake Cymoril.'
 Arioch's face bore a little, secret smile for a moment and Elric realised that he had avoided a trap. If
he had killed Yyrkoon, Cymoril would never have woken again.
 'And what is this little traitor doing with you?' Arioch turned a cold eye on Rackhir who did his best
to stare back at the Chaos Lord.
 'He is my friend,' said Elric. 'I made a bargain with him. If he aided me to find the Black Sword,
then I would take him back with me to our own plane.'
 'That is impossible. Rackhir is an exile here. That is his punishment.'
 'He comes back with me,' said Elric. And now he unhooked the scabbard holding Stormbringer
from his belt and he held the sword out before him. 'Or I do not take the sword with me. Failing that, we
all three remain here for eternity.'
 'That is not sensible, Elric. Consider your responsibilities.'
 'I have considered them. That is my decision.'
 Arioch's smooth face had just a tinge of anger. 'You must take the sword. It is your destiny.'
 'So you say. But I now know that the sword may only be borne by me. You cannot bear it, Arioch,
or you would. Only I--or another mortal like me--can take it from the Pulsing Cavern. Is that not so?'
 'You are clever, Elric of Melnibone.' Arioch spoke with sardonic admiration. 'And you are a fitting
servant of Chaos. Very well--that traitor can go with you. But he would be best warned to tread warily.
'The Lords of Chaos have been known to bear malice...'
 Rackhir said hoarsely: 'So I have heard, My Lord Arioch.'
 Arioch ignored the archer. 'The man of Phum is not, after all, important. And if you wish to spare
your cousin's life, so be it, It matters little. Destiny can contain a few extra threads in her design and still
accomplish her original aims.'
 'Very well then,' said Elric. 'Take us from this place.'
 'Where to?'
 'Why, to Melnibone, if you please.'
 With a smile that was almost tender Arioch looked down on Elric and a silky hand stroked Elric's
cheek. Arioch had grown to twice his original size. 'Oh, you are surely the sweetest of all my slaves,' said
the Lord of Chaos.
 And there was a whirling. There was a sound like the roar of the sea. There was a dreadful sense of
nausea. And three weary men stood on the floor of the great throne room in Imrryr. The throne room was 
deserted, save that in one corner a black shape, like smoke, writhed for a moment and then was gone.
 Rackhir crossed the floor and seated himself carefully upon the first step to the Ruby Throne.
Yyrkoon and Elric remained where they were, staring into each other's eyes. Then Elric laughed and
slapped his scabbarded sword. 'Now you must fulfil your promises to me, cousin. Then I have a
proposition to put to you.'
 'It is like a market place,' said Rackhir, leaning on one elbow and inspecting the feather in his
scarlet hat. 'So many bargains!'


5

The Pale King's Mercy

 YYRKOON STEPPED BACK from his sister's bed. He was worn and his features were drawn and
there was no spirit in him as he said: 'It is done.' He turned away and looked through the window at the
towers of Imrryr, at the harbour where the returned golden battle-barges rode at anchor, together with the
ship which had been King Straasha's gift to Elric. 'She will wake in a moment,' added Yyrkoon absently.
 Dyvim Tvar and Rackhir the Red Archer looked inquiringly at Elric who kneeled by the bed,
staring into the face of Cymoril. Her face grew peaceful as he watched and for one terrible moment he
suspected Prince Yyrkoon of tricking him and of killing Cymoril. But then the eyelids moved and the
eyes opened and she saw him and she smiled. 'Elric? The dreams... You are safe?'
 'I am safe, Cymoril. As are you.'
 'Yyrkoon...?'
 'He woke you.'
 'But you swore to slay him...'
 'I was as much subject to sorcery as you. My mind was confused. It is still confused where some
matters are concerned. But Yyrkoon is changed now. I defeated him. He does not doubt my power. He
no longer lusts to usurp me.'
 'You are merciful, Elric.' She brushed raven hair from her face.
 Elric exchanged a glance with Rackhir.
 'It might not be mercy which moves me,' said Elric. 'It might merely be a sense of fellowship with
Yyrkoon.'
 'Fellowship? Surely you cannot feel... ?'
 'We are both mortal. We were both victims of a game played between the Lords of the Higher
Worlds. My loyalty must, finally, be to my own kind--and that is why I ceased to hate Yyrkoon.'
 'And that is mercy,' said Cymoril.
 Yyrkoon walked towards the door. 'May I leave, my lord emperor?'
 Elric thought he detected a strange light in his defeated cousin's eyes. But perhaps it was only
humility or despair. He nodded. Yyrkoon went from the room, closing the door softly.
 Dyvim Tvar said: 'Trust Yyrkoon not at all, Elric. He will betray you again.' The Lord of the
Dragon Caves was troubled.
 'No,' said Elric. 'If he does not fear me, he fears the sword I now carry.'
 'And you should fear that sword,' said Dyvim Tvar.
 'No,' said Elric. 'I am the master of the sword.'
 Dyvim Tvar made to speak again but then shook his head almost sorrowfully, bowed and, together
with Rackhir the Red Archer, left Elric and Cymoril alone.
 Cymoril took Elric in her arms. They kissed. They wept.

 There were celebrations in Melnibone for a week.
 Now almost all the ships and men and dragons were home. And Elric was home, having proved his 
right to rule so well that all his strange quirks of character (this 'mercy' of his was perhaps the strangest)
were accepted by the populace.
 In the throne room there was a ball and it was the most lavish ball any of the courtiers had ever
known. Elric danced with Cymoril, taking a full part in the activities. Only Yyrkoon did not dance,
preferring to remain in a quiet corner below the gallery of the music-slaves; ignored by the guests.
Rackhir the Red Archer danced with several Melnibonean ladies and made assignations with them all,
for he was a hero now in Melnibone. Dyvim Tvar danced, too, though his eyes were often brooding
when they fell upon Prince Yyrkoon.
 And later, when people ate, Elric spoke to Cymoril as they sat together on the dais of the Ruby
Throne.
 'Would you be empress, Cymoril?'
 'You know I will marry you, Elric. We have both known that for many a year, have we not?'
 'So you would be my wife?'
 'Aye.' She laughed for she thought he joked.
 'And not be empress? For a year at least?'
 'What mean you, my lord.'
 'I must go away from Melnibone, Cymoril, for a year. What I have learned in recent months has
made me want to travel the Young Kingdoms--see how other nations conduct their affairs. For I think
Melnibone must change if she is to survive. She could become a great force for good in the world, for
she still has much power.'
 'For good?' Cymoril was surprised and there was a little alarm in her voice, too. 'Melnibone has
never stood for good or for evil, but for herself and the satisfaction of her desires.'
 'I would see that changed.'
 'You intend to alter everything?'
 'I intend to travel the world and then decide if there is any point to such a decision. The Lords of the
Higher Worlds have ambitions in our world. Though they have given me aid, of late, I fear them. I
should like to see if it is possible for men to rule their own affairs.'
 'And you will go?' There were tears in her eyes. 'When?'
 'Tomorrow--when Rackhir leaves. We will take King Straasha's ship and make for the Isle of the
Purple Towns where Rackhir has friends. Will you come?'
 'I cannot imagine--I cannot. Oh, Elric, why spoil this happiness we now have?'
 'Because I feel that the happiness cannot last unless we know completely what we are.'
 She frowned. 'Then you must discover that, if that is what you wish,' she said slowly. 'But it is for
you to discover alone, Elric, for I have no such desire. You must go by yourself into those barbarian
lands.'
 'You will not accompany me?'
 'It is not possible. I--I am Melnibonean...' She sighed. ' I love you, Elric.'
 'And I you, Cymoril.'
 'Then we shall be married when you return. In a year.'
 Elric was full of sorrow, but he knew that his decision was correct. If he did not leave, he would
grow restless soon enough and if he grew restless he might come to regard Cymoril as an enemy,
someone who had trapped him.
 'Then you must rule as empress until I return,' he said.
 'No, Elric I cannot take that responsibility.'
 'Then, who...? Dyvim Tvar...'
 'I know Dyvim Tvar. He will not take such power.
 Magum Colim, perhaps . . .'
 'No.'
 'Then you must stay, Elric.'
 But Elric's gaze had travelled through the crowd in the throne room below. It stopped when it
reached a lonely figure seated by itself under the gallery of the music-slaves. And Elric smiled ironically
and said:
 'Then it must be Yyrkoon.'
 Cymoril was horrified. 'No, Elric. He will abuse any power...'
 'Not now. And it is just. He is the only one who wanted to be emperor. Now he can rule as emperor
for a year in my stead. If he rules well, I may consider abdicating in his favour. If he rules badly, it will
prove, once and for all, that his ambitions were misguided.'
 'Elric,' said Cymoril. 'I love you. But you are a fool--a criminal, if you trust Yyrkoon again.'
 'No,' he said evenly. 'I am not a fool. All I am is Elric. I cannot help that, Cymoril.'
 'It is Elric that I love!' she cried. 'But Elric is doomed. We are all doomed unless you remain here
now.'
 'I cannot. Because I love you, Cymoril, I cannot.'  She stood up. She was weeping. She was lost.
 'And I am Cymoril,' she said. 'You will destroy us both.' Her voice softened and she stroked his hair.
'You will destroy us, Elric.'
 'No,' he said. 'I will build something that will be better. I will discover things. When I return we
shall marry and we shall live long and we shall be happy, Cymoril.'
 And now, Elric had told three lies. The first concerned his cousin Yyrkoon. The second concerned
the Black Sword. The third concerned Cymoril. And upon those three lies was Elric's destiny to be built,
for it is only about things which concern us most profoundly that we lie clearly and with profound
conviction.


 EPILOGUE

 THERE WAS A port called Menii which was one of the humblest and friendliest of the Purple
Towns. Like the others on the isle it was built mainly of the purple stone which gave the towns their
name. And there were red roofs on the houses and there were bright-sailed boats of all kinds in the
harbour as Elric and Rackhir the Red Archer came ashore in the early morning when just a few sailors
were beginning to make their way down to their ships.
 King Straasha's lovely ship lay some way out beyond the harbour wall. They had used a small boat
to cross the water between it and the town. They turned and looked back at the ship, They had sailed it
themselves, without crew, and the ship had sailed well.
 'So, I must seek peace and mythic Tanelorn,' said Rackhir, with a certain amount of self-mockery.
He stretched and yawned and the bow and the quiver danced on his back.
 Elric was dressed in simple costume that might have marked any soldier-of-fortune of the Young
Kingdoms. He looked fit and relaxed. He smiled into the sun. The only remarkable thing about his garb
was the great, black runesword at his side. Since he had donned the sword, he had needed no drugs to
sustain him at all.
 'And I must seek knowledge in the lands I find marked upon my map,' said Elric. 'I must learn and I
must carry what I learn back to Melnibone at the end of a year. I wish that Cymoril had accompanied me,
but I understand her reluctance.'
 'You will go back?' Rackhir said. 'When a year is over?'
 'She will draw me back!' Elric laughed. 'My only fear is that I will weaken and return before my
quest is finished.'
 'I should like to come with you,' said Rackhir, 'for I have travelled in most lands and would be as
good a guide as I was in the netherworld. But I am sworn to find Tanelorn, for all I know it does not
really exist.'
 'I hope that you find it, Warrior Priest of Phum,' said Elric.
 'I shall never be that again,' said Rackhir. Then his eyes widened a little. 'Why, look--your ship!'
 And Elric looked and saw the ship that had once been called The Ship Which Sails Over Land and
Sea, and he saw that slowly it was sinking. King Straasha was taking it back.
 'The elementals are friends, at least,' he said. 'But I fear their power wanes as the power of
Melnibone wanes. For all that we of the Dragon Isle are considered evil by the folk of the Young
Kingdoms, we share much in common with the spirits of Air, Earth, Fire and Water.'
 Rackhir said, as the masts of the ship disappeared beneath the waves: 'I envy you those friends,
Elric. You may trust them.'
 'Aye.'
 Rackhir looked at the runesword hanging on Elric's hip. 'But you would be wise to trust nothing
else,' he added.
 Elric laughed. 'Fear not for me, Rackhir, for I am my own master--for a year at least. And I am
master of this sword now!'
 The sword seemed to stir at his side and he took firm hold of its grip and slapped Rackhir on the
back and he laughed and shook his white hair so that it drifted in the air and he lifted his strange, red
eyes to the sky and he said:
 'I shall be a new man when I return to Melnibone.'



Here ends Book One of the Elric Saga
 
The Sailor on the Seas of Fate
Book two of the Elric Saga
By
Michael Moorcock

All rights reserved. Copyright (c) 1976 by Michael Moorcock.
This ebook is in no way an attempt to challenge the copyright holder for this material. If you enjoy this
author's work, please purchase a paper version of this book.


Book ONE

SAILING TO THE FUTURE


 . . . and leaving his cousin Yyrkoon sitting as regent upon the Ruby Throne of Melnibon, leaving
his cousin Cymoril weeping for him and despairing of his ever returning, Elric sailed from Imrryr, the
Dreaming City, and went to seek an unknown goal in the worlds of the Young Kingdoms where
Melnibonans were, at best, disliked.
 -THE CHRONICLE OF THE BLACK SWORD


 I

 It was as if the man stood in a vast cavern whose walls and roof were comprised of gloomy,
unstable colors which would occasionally break and admit rays of light from the moon. That these walls
were mere clouds massed above mountains and ocean was hard to believe, for all that the moonlight
pierced them, stained them and revealed the black and turbulent sea washing the shore on which the man
now stood.
 Distant thunder rolled; distant lightning flickered. A thin rain fell. And the clouds were never still.
From dusky jet to deadly white they swirled slowly, like the cloaks of men and women engaged in a
trancelike and formalistic minuet: the man standing on the shingle of the grim beach was reminded of
giants dancing to the music of the faraway storm and felt as one must feel who walks unwittingly into a
hall where the gods are at play. He turned his gaze from the clouds to the ocean.
 The sea seemed weary. Great waves heaved themselves together with difficulty and collapsed as if
in relief, gasping as they struck sharp rocks.
 The man pulled his hood closer about his face and he looked over his leathern shoulder more than
once as he trudged closer to the sea and let the surf spill upon the toes of his knee-length black boots. He
tried to peer into the cavern formed by the clouds but could see only a short distance. There was no way
of telling what lay on the other side of the ocean or, indeed, how far the water extended. He put his head
on one side, listening carefully, but could hear nothing but the sounds of the sky and the sea. He sighed.
For a moment a moonbeam touched him and from the white flesh of his face there glowed two crimson,
tormented eyes; then darkness came back. Again the man turned, plainly fearing that the light had
revealed him to some enemy. Making as little sound as possible, he headed toward the shelter of the
rocks on his left.
 Elric was tired. In the city of Ryfel in the land of Pikarayd he had naively sought acceptance by
offering his services as a mercenary in the army of the governor of that place. For his foolishness he had
been imprisoned as a Melnibonan spy (it was obvious to the governor that Elric could be nothing else) 
and had but recently escaped with the aid of bribes and some minor sorcery.
 The pursuit, however, had been almost immediate. Dogs of great cunning had been employed and
the governor himself had led the hunt beyond the borders of Pikarayd and into the lonely, uninhabited
shale valleys of a world locally called the Dead Hills, in which little grew or tried to live.
 Up the steep sides of small mountains, whose slopes consisted of gray, crumbling slate, which made
a clatter to be heard a mile or more away, the white-faced one had ridden. Along dales all but grassless
and whose river-bottoms had seen no water for scores of years, through cave-tunnels bare of even a
stalactite, over plateaus from which rose cairns of stones erected by a forgotten folk, he had sought to
escape his pursuers, and soon it seemed to him that he had left the world he knew forever, that he had
crossed a supernatural frontier and had arrived in one of those bleak places of which he had read in the
legends of his people, where once Law and Chaos had fought each other to a stalemate, leaving their
battleground empty of life and the possibility of life.
 And at last he had ridden his horse so hard that its heart had burst and he had abandoned its corpse
and continued on foot, panting to the sea, to this narrow beach, unable to go farther forward and fearing
to return lest his enemies should be lying in wait for him.
 He thought that he would give much for a boat now. It would not be long before the dogs
discovered his scent and led their masters to the beach. He shrugged. Best to die here alone, perhaps,
slaughtered by those who did not even know his name. His only regret would be that Cymoril would
wonder why he had not returned at the end of the year.
 He had no food and few of the drugs which had of late sustained his energy. Without renewed
energy he could not contemplate working a sorcery which might conjure for him some means of crossing
the sea and making, perhaps, for the Isle of the Purple Towns where the people were least unfriendly to
Melnibonans.
 It had been only a month since he had left behind his court and his queen-to-be, letting Yyrkoon sit
on the throne of Melnibon until his return. He had thought he might learn more of the human folk of the
Young Kingdoms by mixing with them, but they had rejected him either with outright hatred or wary and
insincere humility. Nowhere had he found one willing to believe that a Melnibonan (and they did not
know he was the emperor) would willingly throw in his lot with the human beings who had once been in
thrall to that cruel and ancient race. And now, as he stood beside a bleak sea feeling trapped and already
defeated, he knew himself to be alone in a malevolent universe, bereft of friends and purpose, a useless,
sickly anachronism, a fool brought low by his own insufficiencies of character, by his profound inability
to believe wholly in the tightness or the wrongness of anything at all. He lacked faith in his race, in his
birthright, in gods or men, and above all he lacked faith in himself.
 His pace slackened; his hand fell upon the pommel of his black runesword Stormbringer, the blade
which had so recently defeated its twin, Mournblade, in the fleshy chamber within a sunless world of
Limbo. Stormbringer, seemingly half-sentient, was now his only companion, his only confidant, and it
had become his neurotic habit to talk to the sword as another might talk to his horse or as a prisoner
might share his thoughts with a cockroach in his cell.
 "Well, Stormbringer, shall we walk into the sea and end it now?" His voice was dead, barely a
whisper. "At least we shall have the pleasure of thwarting those who follow us."
 He made a halfhearted movement toward the sea, but to his fatigued brain it seemed that the sword
murmured, stirred against his hip, pulled back. The albino chuckled. "You exist to live and to take lives.
Do I exist, then, to die and bring both those I love and hate the mercy of death? Sometimes I think so. A
sad pattern, if that should be the pattern. Yet there must be more to all this...."
 He turned his back upon the sea, peering upward at the monstrous clouds forming and reforming
above his head, letting the light ram fall upon his face, listening to the complex, melancholy music which
the sea made as it washed over rocks and shingle and was carried this way and that by conflicting
currents. The rain did little to refresh him. He had not slept at all for two nights and had slept hardly at
all for several more. He must have ridden for almost a week before his horse collapsed.
 At the base of a damp granite crag which rose nearly thirty feet above his head, he found a
depression in the ground in which he could squat and be protected from the worst of the wind and the
rain. Wrapping his heavy leather cloak tightly about him, he eased himself into the hole and was
immediately asleep. Let them find while he slept. He wanted no warning of his death.
 Harsh, gray light struck his eyes as he stirred. He raised his neck, holding back a groan at the
stiffness of his muscles, and he opened his eyes. He blinked. It was morning-perhaps even later, for the
sun was invisible -and a cold mist covered the beach. Through the mist the darker clouds could still be
seen above, increasing the effect of his being inside a huge cavern. Muffled a little, the sea continued to
splash and hiss, though it seemed calmer than it had on the previous night, and there were now no sounds
of a storm. The air was very cold.
 Elric began to stand up, leaning on his sword for support, listening carefully, but there was no sign
that his enemies were close by. Doubtless they had given up the chase, perhaps after finding his dead
horse.
 He reached into his belt pouch and took from it a sliver of smoked bacon and a vial of yellowish
liquid. He sipped from the vial, replaced the stopper, and returned the vial to his pouch as he chewed on
the meat. He was thirsty. He trudged farther up the beach and found a pool of rainwater not too tainted
with salt. He drank his fill, staring around him. The mist was fairly thick and if he moved too far from
the beach he knew he would become immediately lost. Yet did that matter? He had nowhere to go. Those
who had pursued him must have realized that. Without a horse he could not cross back to Pikarayd, the
most easterly of the Young Kingdoms. Without a boat he could not venture onto that sea and try to steer
a course back to the Isle of the Purple Towns. He recalled no map which showed an eastern sea and he
had little idea of how far he had traveled from Pikarayd. He decided that his only hope of surviving was
to go north, following the coast in the trust that sooner or later he would come upon a port or a fishing
village where he might trade his few remaining belongings for a passage on a boat. Yet that hope was a
small one, for his food and his drugs could hardly last more than a day or so.
 He took a deep breath to steel himself for the march and then regretted it; the mist cut at his throat
and his lungs like a thousand tiny knives. He coughed. He spat upon the shingle.
 And he heard something, something other than the moody whisperings of the sea: a regular creaking
sound, as of a man walking in stiff leather. His right hand went to his left hip and the sword which rested
there. He turned about, peering in every direction for the source of the noise, but the mist distorted it. It
could have come from anywhere.
 Elric crept back to the rock where he had sheltered. He leaned against it so that no swordsman could
take him unawares from behind. He waited.
 The creaking came again, but other sounds were added. He heard a clanking; a splash; perhaps a
voice, perhaps a footfall on timber; and he guessed that either he was experiencing a hallucination as a
side effect of the drug he had just swallowed or he had heard a ship coming toward the beach and
dropping its anchor.
 He felt relieved and he was tempted to laugh at himself for assuming so readily that this coast must
be uninhabited. He had thought that the bleak cliffs stretched for miles-perhaps hundreds of miles-in all
directions. The assumption could easily have been the subjective result of his depression, his weariness.
It occurred to him that he might as easily have discovered a land not shown on maps, yet with a
sophisticated culture of its own: with sailing ships, for instance, and harbors for them. Yet still he did not
reveal himself.
 Instead he withdrew behind the rock, peering into the mist toward the sea. And at last he discerned a
shadow which had not been there the previous night. A black, angular shadow which could only be a
ship. He made out the suggestion of ropes, he heard men grunting, he heard the creak and the rasp of a
yard as it traveled up a mast. The sail was being furled.
 Elric waited at least an hour, expecting the crew of the ship to disembark. They could have no other
reason for entering this treacherous bay. But a silence had descended, as if the whole ship slept.
 Cautiously Elric emerged from behind the rock and walked down to the edge of the sea. Now he
could see the ship a little more clearly. Red sunlight was behind it, thin and watery, diffused by the mist.
It was a good-sized ship and fashioned throughout of the same dark wood. Its design was baroque and
unfamiliar, with high decks fore and aft and no evidence of rowing ports. This was unusual in a ship
either of Melnibonan or Young Kingdoms design and it tended to prove his theory that he had stumbled
upon a civilization for some reason cut off from the rest of the world, just as Elwher and the Unmapped
Kingdoms were cut off by the vast stretches of the Sighing Desert and the Weeping Waste. He saw no
movement aboard, heard none of the sounds one might usually expect to hear on a seagoing ship, even if
the larger part of the crew was resting. The mist eddied and more of the red light poured through to
illuminate the vessel, revealing the large wheels on both the fore-deck and the reardeck, the slender mast
with its furled sail, the complicated geometrical carvings of its rails and its figurehead, the great curving
prow which gave the ship its main impression of power and strength and made Elric think it must be a
warship rather than a trading vessel. But who was there to fight in such waters as these?
 He cast aside his wariness and cupped his hands about his mouth, calling out:
 "Hail, the ship!"
 The answering silence seemed to him to take on a peculiar hesitancy as if those on board heard him
and wondered if they should answer.
 "Hail, the ship!"
 Then a figure appeared on the port rail and, leaning over, looked casually toward him. The figure
had on armor as dark and as strange as the design of his ship; he had a helmet obscuring most of his face
and the main feature that Elric could distinguish was a thick, golden beard and sharp blue eyes.
 "Hail, the shore," said the armored man. His accent was unknown to Elric, his tone was as casual as
his manner. Elric thought he smiled. "What do you seek with us?"
 "Aid," said Elric. "I am stranded here. My horse is dead. I am lost."
 "Lost? Aha!" The man's voice echoed in the mist. "Lost. And you wish to come aboard?"
 "I can pay a little. I can give my services in return for a passage, either to your next port of call or to
some land close to the Young Kingdoms where maps are available so that I could make my own way
thereafter...."
 "Well," said the other slowly, "there's work for a swordsman."
 "I have a sword," said Elric.
 "I see it. A good, big battle-blade."
 "Then I can come aboard?"
 "We must confer first. If you would be good enough to wait awhile ..."
 "Of course," said Elric. He was nonplussed by the man's manner, but the prospect of warmth and
food on board the ship was cheering. He waited patiently until the blond-bearded warrior came back to
the rail.
 "Your name, sir?" said the warrior.
 "I am Elric of Melnibon."
 The warrior seemed to be consulting a parchment, running his finger down a list until he nodded,
satisfied, and put the list into his large-buckled belt.
 "Well," he said, "there was some point in waiting here, after all. I found it difficult to believe."
 "What was the dispute and why did you wait?"
 "For you," said the warrior, heaving a rope ladder over the side so that its end fell into the sea. "Will
you board now, Elric of Melnibon?"


 II

 Elric was surprised by how shallow the water was and he wondered by what means such a large 
vessel could come so close to the shore. Shoulder-deep in the sea he reached up to grasp the ebony rungs
of the ladder. He had great difficulty heaving himself from the water and was further hampered by the
swaying of the ship and the weight of his runesword, but eventually he had clambered awkwardly over
the side and stood on the deck with the water running from his clothes to the timbers and his body
shivering with cold. He looked about him. Shining, red-tinted mist clung about the ship's dark yards and
rigging, white mist spread itself over the roofs and sides of the two large cabins set fore and aft of the
mast, and this mist was not of the same character as the mist beyond the ship. Elric, for a moment, had
the fanciful notion that the mist traveled permanently wherever the ship traveled. He smiled to himself,
putting the dreamlike quality of his experience down to lack of food and sleep. When the ship sailed into
sunnier waters he would see it for the relatively ordinary vessel it was.
 The blond warrior took Elric's arm. The man was as tall as Elric and massively built. Within his
helm he smiled, saying:
 "Let us go below."
 They went to the cabin forward of the mast and the warrior drew back a sliding door, standing aside
to let Elric enter first. Elric ducked his head and went into the warmth of the cabin. A lamp of red-gray
glass gleamed, hanging from four silver chains attached to the roof, revealing several more bulky figures,
fully dressed in a variety of armors, seated about a square and sturdy sea-table. All faces turned to regard
Elric as he came in, followed by the blond warrior who said:
 "This is he."
 One of the occupants of the cabin, who sat in the farthest corner and whose features were
completely hidden by the shadow, nodded. "Aye," he said. "That is he."
 "You know me, sir," said Elric, seating himself at the end of the bench and removing his sodden
leather cloak. The warrior nearest him passed him a metal cup of hot wine and Elric accepted it
gratefully, sipping at the spiced liquid and marveling at how quickly it dispersed the chill within him.
 "In a sense," said the man in the shadows. His voice was sardonic and at the same time had a
melancholy ring, and Elric was not offended, for the bitterness in the voice seemed directed more at the
owner than at any he addressed.
 The blond warrior seated himself opposite Elric. "I am Brut," he said, "once of Lashmar, where my
family still holds land, but it is many a year since I have been there."
 "From the Young Kingdoms, then?" said Elric.
 "Aye. Once."
 "This ship journeys nowhere near those nations?" Elric asked.
 "I believe it does not," said Brut. "It is not so long, I think, since I myself came aboard. I was
seeking Tanelorn, but found this craft, instead."
 "Tanelorn?" Elric smiled. "How many must seek that mythical place? Do you know of one called
Rackhir, once a warrior priest of Phum? We adventured together quite recently. He left to look for
Tanelorn."
 "I do not know him," said Brut of Lashmar.
 "And these waters," said Elric, "do they lie far from the Young Kingdoms?"
 "Very far," said the man in the shadows.
 "Are you from Elwher, perhaps?" asked Elric. "Or from any other of what we in the west call the
Unmapped Kingdoms?"
 "Most of our lands are not on your maps," said the man in the shadows. And he laughed. Again
Elric found that he was not offended. And he was not particularly troubled by the mysteries hinted at by
the man in the shadows. Soldiers of fortune (as he deemed these men to be) were fond of their private
jokes and references; it was usually all that united them save a common willingness to hire their swords
to whomever could pay.
 Outside the anchor was rattling and the ship rolled. Elric heard the yard being lowered and he heard
the smack of the sail as it was unfurled. He wondered how they hoped to leave the bay with so little wind 
available. He noticed that the faces of the other warriors (where their faces were visible) had taken on a
rather set look as the ship began to move. He looked from one grim, haunted face to another and he
wondered if his own features bore the same cast.
 "For where do we sail?" he asked.
 Brut shrugged: "I know only that we had to stop to wait for you, Elric of Melnibon."
 "You knew I would be there?"
 The man in the shadows stirred and helped himself to more hot wine from the jug set into a hole in
the center of the table. "You are the last one we need," he said. "I was the first taken aboard. So far I
have not regretted my decision to make the voyage."
 "Your name, sir?" Elric decided he would no longer be at that particular disadvantage.
 "Oh, names? Names? I have so many. The one I favor is Erekos. But I have been called Urlik
Skarsol and John Daker and Ilian of Garathorm to my certain knowledge. Some would have me believe
that I have been Elric Womanslayer...."
 "Womanslayer? An unpleasant nickname. Who is this other Elric?"
 "That I cannot completely answer," said Erekos. "But I share a name, it seems, with more than one
aboard this ship. I, like Brut, sought Tanelorn and found myself here instead."
 "We have that in common," said another. He was a black-skinned warrior, the tallest of the
company, his features oddly enhanced by a scar running like an inverted V from his forehead and over
both eyes, down his cheeks to his jawbones. "I was in a land called Ghaja-Ki, a most unpleasant,
swampy place, filled with perverse and diseased life. I had heard of a city said to exist there and I
thought it might be Tanelorn. It was not. And it was inhabited by a blue-skinned, hermaphroditic race
who determined to cure me of what they considered my malformations of hue and sexuality. This scar
you see was their work. The pain of their operation gave me strength to escape them and I ran naked into
the swamps, floundering for many a mile until the swamp became a lake feeding a broad river over
which hung black clouds of insects which set upon me hungrily. This ship appeared and I was more than
glad to seek its sanctuary. I am Otto Blendker, once a scholar of Brunse, now a hireling sword for my
sins."
 "This Brunse? Does it lie near Elwher?" said Elric. He had never heard of such a place, nor such an
outlandish name, in the Young Kingdoms.
 The black man shook his head. "I know naught of Elwher."
 "Then the world is a considerably larger place than I imagined," said Elric.
 "Indeed it is," said Erekos. "What would you say if I offered you the theory that the sea on which
we sail spans more than one world?"
 "I would be inclined to believe you." Elric smiled. "I have studied such theories. More, I have
experienced adventures in worlds other than my own."
 "It is a relief to hear it," said Erekos. "Not all on board this ship are willing to accept my theory."
 "I come closer to accepting it," said Otto Blendker, "though I find it terrifying."
 "It is that," agreed Erekos. "More terrifying than you can imagine, friend Otto."
 Elric leaned across the table and helped himself to a further mug of wine. His clothes were already
drying and physically he had a sense of well-being. "I'll be glad to leave this misty shore behind."
 "The shore has been left already," said Brut, "but as for the mist, it is ever with us. Mist appears to
follow the ship-or else the ship creates the mist wherever it travels. It is rare that we see land at all and
when we do see it, as we saw it today, it is usually obscured, like a reflection in a dull and buckled
shield."
 "We sail on a supernatural sea," said another, holding out a gloved hand for the jug. Elric passed it
to him. "In Hasghan, where I come from, we have a legend of a Bewitched Sea. If a mariner finds
himself sailing in those waters he may never return and will be lost for eternity."
 "Your legend contains at least some truth, I fear, Terndrik of Hasghan," Brut said.
 "How many warriors are on board?" Elric asked.
 "Sixteen other than the Four," said Erekos. "Twenty in all. The crew numbers about ten and then
there is the captain. You will see him soon, doubtless."
 "The Four? Who are they?"
 Erekos laughed. "You and I are two of them. The other two occupy the aft cabin. And if you wish
to know why we are called the Four, you must ask the captain, though I warn you his answers are rarely
satisfying."
 Elric realized that he was being pressed slightly to one side. "The ship makes good speed," he said
laconically, "considering how poor the wind was."
 "Excellent speed," agreed Erekos'. He rose from his corner, a broad-shouldered man with an
ageless face bearing the evidence of considerable experience. He was handsome and he had plainly seen
much conflict, for both his hands and his face were heavily scarred, though not disfigured. His eyes,
though deep-set and dark, seemed of no particular color and yet were familiar to Elric. He felt that he
might have seen those eyes in a dream once.
 "Have we met before?" Elric asked him.
 "Oh, possibly-or shall meet. What does it matter? Our fates are the same. We share an identical
doom. And possibly we share more than that."
 "More? I hardly comprehend the first part of your statement."
 "Then it is for the best," said Erekos, inching past his comrades and emerging on the other side of
the table. He laid a surprisingly gentle hand on Elric's shoulder. "Come, we must seek audience with the
captain. He expressed a wish to see you shortly after you came aboard."
 Elric nodded and rose. "This captain-what is his name?"
 "He has none he will reveal to us," said Erekos. Together they emerged onto the deck. The mist
was if anything thicker and of the same deathly whiteness, no longer tinted by the sun's rays. It was hard
to see to the far ends of the ship and for all that they were evidently moving rapidly, there was no hint of
a wind. Yet it was warmer than Elric might have expected. He followed Erekos forward to the cabin set
under the deck on which one of the ship's twin wheels stood, tended by a tall man in sea-coat and
leggings of quilted deerskin who was so still as to resemble a statue. The red-haired steersman did not
look around or down as they advanced toward the cabin, but Elric caught a glimpse of his face.
 The door seemed built of some kind of smooth metal possessing a sheen almost like the healthy
coat of an animal. It was reddish-brown and the most colorful thing Elric had so far seen on the ship.
Erekos knocked softly upon the door. "Captain," he said. "Elric is here."
 "Enter," said a voice at once melodious and distant.
 The door opened. Rosy light flooded out, half-blinding Elric as he walked in. As his eyes adapted,
he could see a very tall, pale-clad man standing upon a richly hued carpet in the middle of the cabin.
Elric heard the door close and realized that Erekos had not accompanied him inside.
 "Are you refreshed, Elric?" said the captain.
 "I am, sir, thanks to your wine."
 The captain's features were no more human than were Elric's. They were at once finer and more
powerful than those of the Melnibonan, yet bore a slight resemblance in that the eyes were inclined to
taper, as did the face, toward the chin. The captain's long hair fell to his shoulders in red-gold waves and
was kept back from his brow by a circlet of blue jade. His body was clad in buff-colored tunic and hose
and there were sandals of silver and silver-thread laced to his calves. Apart from his clothing, he was
twin to the steersman Elric had recently seen.
 "Will you have more wine?"
 The captain moved toward a chest on the far side of the cabin, near the porthole, which was closed.
 "Thank you," said Elric. And now he realized why the eyes had not focused on him. The captain
was blind.
 For all that his movements were deft and assured, it was obvious that he could not see at all. He 
poured the wine from a silver jug into a silver cup and began to cross toward Elric, holding the cup out
before him. Elric stepped forward and accepted it.
 "I am grateful for your decision to join us," said the captain. "I am much relieved, sir."
 "You are courteous," said Elric, "though I must add that my decision was not difficult to make. I
had nowhere else to go."
 "I understand that. It is why we put into shore when and where we did. You will find that all your
companions were in a similar position before they, too, came aboard."
 "You appear to have considerable knowledge of the movements of many men," said Elric. He held
the wine untasted in his left hand.
 "Many," agreed the captain, "on many worlds. I understand that you are a person of culture, sir, so
you will be aware of something of the nature of the sea upon which my ship sails."
 "I think so."
 "She sails between the worlds, for the most part-between the planes of a variety of aspects of the
same world, to be a little more exact." The captain hesitated, turning his blind face away from Elric.
"Please know that I do not deliberately mystify you. There are some things I do not understand and other
things which I may not completely reveal. It is a trust I have and I hope you feel you can respect it."
 "I have no reason as yet to do otherwise," replied the albino. And he took a sip of the wine.
 "I find myself with a fine company," said the captain. "I hope that you continue to think it
worthwhile honoring my trust when we reach our destination."
 "And what is that, Captain?"
 "An island indigenous to these waters."
 "That must be a rarity."
 "Indeed, it is, and once undiscovered, uninhabited by those we must count our enemies. Now that
they have found it and realize its power, we are in great danger."
 "We? You mean your race or those aboard your ship?"
The captain smiled. "I have no race, save myself. I speak, I suppose, of all humanity."
"These enemies are not human, then?"
"No. They are inextricably involved in human affairs, but this fact has not instilled in them any loyalty to
us. I use 'humanity,' of course, in its broader sense, to include yourself and myself."
 "I understood," said Elric. "What is this folk called?"
"Many things," said the captain. "Forgive me, but I cannot continue longer now. If you will ready
yourself for battle I assure you that I will reveal more to you as soon as the time is right."
 Only when Elric stood again outside the reddish-brown door, watching Erekos advancing up the
deck through the mist, did the albino wonder if the captain had charmed him to the point where he had
forgotten all common sense. Yet the blind man had impressed him and he had, after all, nothing better to
do than to sail on to the island. He shrugged. He could always alter his decision if he discovered that
those upon the island were not, in his opinion, enemies.
 "Are you more mystified or less, Elric?" said Erekos, smiling.
 "More mystified in some ways, less in others," Elric told him. "And, for some reason, I do not
care."
 "Then you share the feeling of the whole company," Erekos told him.
 It was only when Erekos led him to the cabin aft of the mast that Elric realized he had not asked
the captain what the significance of the Four might be.


 III

 Save that it faced in the opposite direction, the other cabin resembled the first in almost every detail.
Here, too, were seated some dozen men, all experienced soldiers of fortune by their features and their 
clothing. Two sat together at the center of the table's starboard side. One was bareheaded, fair, and
careworn, the other had features resembling Elric's own and he seemed to be wearing a silver gauntlet on
his left hand while the right hand was naked; his armor was delicate and outlandish. He looked up as
Elric entered and there was recognition in his single eye (the other was covered by a brocade-work
patch).
 "Elric of Melnibon!" he exclaimed. "My theories become more meaningful!" He turned to his
companion. "See, Hawkmoon, this is the one of whom I spoke."
 "You know me, sir?" Elric was nonplussed.
 "You recognize me, Elric. You must! At the Tower of Voilodion Ghagnasdiak? With Erekos-
though a different Erekos."
 "I know of no such tower, no name which resembles that, and this is the first I have seen of
Erekos. You know me and you know my name, but I do not know you. I find this disconcerting, sir."
 "I, too, had never met Prince Corum before he came aboard," said Erekos, "yet he insists we
fought together once. I am inclined to believe him. Time on the different planes does not always run
concurrently. Prince Corum might well exist in what we would term the future."
 "I had thought to find some relief from such paradoxes here," said Hawkmoon, passing his hand
over his face. He smiled bleakly. "But it seems there is none at this present moment in the history of the
planes. Everything is in flux and even our identities, it seems, are prone to alter at any moment."
 "We were Three," said Corum. "Do you not recall it, Elric? The Three Who Are One?"
 Elric shook his head.
 Corum shrugged, saying softly to himself, "Well, now we are Four. Did the captain say anything of
an island we are supposed to invade?"
 "He did," said Elric. "Do you know who these enemies might be?"
 "We know no more or less than do you, Elric," said Hawkmoon. "I seek a place called Tanelorn and
two children. Perhaps I seek the Runestaff, too. Of that I am not entirely sure."
 "We found it once," said Corum. "We three. In the Tower of Voilodion Ghagnasdiak. It was of
considerable help to us."
 "As it might be to me," Hawkmoon told him. "I served it once. I gave it a great deal."
 "We have much in common," Erekos put in, "as I told you, Elric. Perhaps we share masters in
common, too?"
 Elric shrugged. "I serve no master but myself."
 And he wondered why they all smiled in the same strange way.
 Erekos said quietly, "On such ventures as these one is inclined to forget much, as one forgets a
dream."
 "This is a dream," said Hawkmoon. "Of late I've dreamed many such."
 "It is all dreaming, if you like," said Corum. "All existence."
 Elric was not interested in such philosophizing. "Dream or reality, the experience amounts to the
same, does it not?"
 "Quite right," said Erekos with a wan smile.
 They talked on for another hour or two until Corum stretched and yawned and commented that he
was feeling sleepy. The others agreed that they were all tired and so they left the cabin and went aft and
below where there were bunks for all the warriors. As he stretched himself out in one of the bunks, Elric
said to Brut of Lashmar, who had climbed into the bunk above:
 "It would help to know when this fight begins."
 Brut looked over the edge, down at the prone albino. "I think it will be soon," he said.
 Elric stood alone upon the deck, leaning upon the rail and trying to make out the sea, but the sea,
like the rest of the world, was hidden by white curling mist. Elric wondered if there were waters flowing
under the ship's keel at all. He looked up to where the sail was tight and swollen at the mast, filled with a
warm and powerful wind. It was light, but again it was not possible to tell the hour of the day. Puzzled 
by Corum's comments concerning an earlier meeting, Elric wondered if there had been other dreams in
his life such as this might be-dreams he had forgotten completely upon awakening. But the uselessness
of such speculation became quickly evident and he turned his attention to more immediate matters,
wondering at the origin of the captain and his strange ship sailing on a stranger ocean.
 "The captain," said Hawkmoon's voice, and Elric turned to bid good morning to the tall, fair-haired
man who bore a strange, regular scar in the center of his forehead, "has requested that we four visit him
in his cabin."
 The other two emerged from the mist and together they made their way to the prow, knocking on
the reddish-brown door and being at once admitted into the presence of the blind captain, who had four
silver wine-cups already poured for them. He gestured them toward the great chest on which the wine
stood. "Please help yourselves, my friends."
 They did so, standing there with the cups in their hands, four tall, doom-haunted swordsmen, each
of a strikingly different cast of features, yet each bearing a certain stamp which marked them as being of
a like kind. Elric noticed it, for all that he was one of them, and he tried to recall the details of what
Corum had told him on the previous evening.
 "We are nearing our destination," said the captain. "It will not be long before we disembark. I do
not believe our enemies expect us, yet it will be a hard fight against those two."
 "Two?" said Hawkmoon. "Only two?"
 "Only two." The captain smiled. "A brother and a sister. Sorcerers from quite another universe than
ours. Due to recent disruptions in the fabric of our worlds- of which you know something, Hawkmoon,
and you, too, Corum-certain beings have been released who would not otherwise have the power they
now possess. And possessing great power, they crave for more-for all the power that there is in our
universe. These beings are amoral in a way in which the Lords of Law or Chaos are not. They do not
fight for influence upon the Earth, as those gods do; their only wish is to convert the essential energy of
our universe to their own uses. I believe they foster some ambition in their particular universe which
would be furthered if they could achieve their wish. At present, in spite of conditions highly favorable to
them, they have not attained their full strength, but the time is not far off before they do attain it. Agak
and Gagak is how they are called in human tongue and they are outside the power of any of our gods, so
a more powerful group has been summoned-yourselves. The Champion Eternal in four of his
incarnations (and four is the maximum number we can risk without precipitating further unwelcome
disruptions among the planes of Earth)-Erekos, Elric, Corum, and Hawkmoon. Each of you will
command four others, whose fates are linked with your own and who are great fighters in their own
right, though they do not share your destinies in every sense. You may each pick the four with whom
you wish to fight. I think you will find it easy enough to decide. We make landfall quite shortly now."
 "You will lead us?" Hawkmoon said.
 "I cannot. I can only take you to the island and wait for those who survive-if any survive."
 Elric frowned. "This fight is not mine, I think."
 "It is yours," said the captain soberly. "And it is mine. I would land with you if that were permitted
me, but it is not."
 "Why so?" asked Corum.
 "You will learn that one day. I have not the courage to tell you. I bear you nothing but goodwill,
however. Be assured of that."
 Erekos rubbed his jaw. "Well, since it is my destiny to fight, and since I, like Hawkmoon, continue
to seek Tanelorn, and since I gather there is some chance of my fulfilling my ambition if I am successful,
I for one agree to go against these two, Agak and Gagak."
 Hawkmoon nodded. "I go with Erekos, for similar reasons."
 "And I," said Corum.
 "Not long since," said Elric, "I counted myself without comrades. Now I have many. For that reason
alone I will fight with them."
 "It is perhaps the best of reasons," said Erekos approvingly.
 "There is no reward for this work, save my assurance that your success will save the world much
misery," said the captain. "And for you, Elric, there is less reward than the rest may hope for."
 "Perhaps not," said Elric.
 "As you say." The captain gestured toward the jug of wine. "More wine, my friends?"
 They each accepted, while the captain continued, his blind face staring upward at the roof of the
cabin.
 "Upon this island is a ruin-perhaps it was once a city called Tanelorn-and at the center of the ruin
stands one whole building. It is this building which Agak and his sister use. It is that which you must
attack. You will recognize it, I hope, at once."
 "And we must slay this pair?" said Erekos.
 "If you can. They have servants who help them. These must be slain, also. Then the building must
be fired. This is important." The captain paused. "Fired. It must be destroyed in no other way."
 Elric smiled a dry smile. "There are few other ways of destroying buildings, Sir Captain."
 The captain returned his smile and made a slight bow of acknowledgment. "Aye, it's so.
Nonetheless, it is worth remembering what I have said."
 "Do you know what these two look like, these Agak and Gagak?" Corum asked.
 "No. It is possible that they resemble creatures of our own worlds; it is possible that they do not.
Few have seen them. It is only recently that they have been able to materialize at all."
 "And how may they best be overwhelmed?" asked Hawkmoon.
 "By courage and ingenuity," said the captain.
 "You are not very explicit, sir," said Elric.
 "I am as explicit as I can be. Now, my friends, I suggest you rest and prepare your arms."
 As they returned to their cabins, Erekos sighed.
 "We are fated," he said. "We have little free will, for all we deceive ourselves otherwise. If we
perish or live through this venture, it will not count for much in the overall scheme of things."
 "I think you are of a gloomy turn of mind, friend," said Hawkmoon.
 The mist snaked through the branches of the mast, writhing in the rigging, flooding the deck. It
swirled across the faces of the other three men as Elric looked at them.
 "A realistic turn of mind," said Corum.
 The mist massed more thickly upon the deck, mantling each man like a shroud. The timbers of the
ship creaked and to Elric's ears took on the sound of a raven's croak. It was colder now. In silence they
went to their cabins to test the hooks and buckles of their armor, to polish and to sharpen their weapons
and to pretend to sleep.
 "Oh, I've no liking for sorcery," said Brut of Lashmar, tugging at his golden beard, "for sorcery it
was resulted in my shame." Elric had told him all that the captain had said and had asked Brut to be one
of the four who fought with him when they landed.
 "It is all sorcery here," Otto Blendker said. And he smiled wanly as he gave Elric his hand. "I'll
fight beside you, Elric."
 His sea-green armor shimmering faintly in the lantern light, another rose, his casque pushed back
from his face. It was a face almost as white as Elric's, though the eyes were deep and near-black. "And
I," said Hown Serpent-tamer, "though I fear I'm little use on still land."
 The last to rise, at Elric's glance, was a warrior who had said little during their earlier conversations.
His voice was deep and hesitant. He wore a plain iron battle-cap and the red hair beneath it was braided.
At the end of each braid was a small fingerbone which rattled on the shoulders of his byrnie as he
moved. This was Ashnar the Lynx, whose eyes were rarely less than fierce. "I lack the eloquence or the
breeding of you other gentlemen," said Ashnar. "And I've no familiarity with sorcery or those other
things of which you speak, but I'm a good soldier and my joy is in fighting. I'll take your orders, Elric, if 
you'll have me."
 "Willingly," said Elric.
 "There is no dispute, it seems," said Erekos to the remaining four who had elected to join him. "All
this is doubtless preordained. Our destinies have been linked from the first."
 "Such philosophy can lead to unhealthy fatalism," said Terndrik of Hasghan. "Best believe our fates
are our own, even if the evidence denies it."
 "You must think as you wish," said Erekos. "I have led many lives, though all, save one, are
remembered but faintly." He shrugged. "Yet I deceive myself, I suppose, in that I work for a time when I
shall find this Tanelorn and perhaps be reunited with the one I seek. That ambition is what gives me
energy, Terndrik."
 Elric smiled. "I fight, I think, because I relish the comradeship of battle. That, in itself, is a
melancholy condition in which to find oneself, is it not?"
 "Aye." Erekos glanced at the floor. "Well, we must try to rest now."
 IV
 The outlines of the coast were dim. They waded through white water and white mist, their swords
held above their heads. Swords were their only weapons. Each of the Four possessed a blade of unusual
size and design, but none bore a sword which occasionally murmured to itself as did Elric's
Stormbringer. Glancing back, Elric saw the captain standing at the rail, his blind face turned toward the
island, his pale lips moving as if he spoke to himself. Now the water was waist-deep and the sand
beneath Elric's feet hardened and became smooth rock. He waded on, wary and ready to carry any attack
to those who might be defending the island. But now the mist grew thinner, as if it could gain no hold on
the land, and there were no obvious signs of defenders.
 Tucked into his belt, each man had a brand, it's end wrapped in oiled cloth so that it should not be
wet when the time came to light it. Similarly, each was equipped with a handful of smoldering tinder in a
little firebox in a pouch attached to his belt, so that the brands could be instantly ignited.
 "Only fire will destroy this enemy forever," the captain had said again as he handed them their
brands and their tinderboxes.
 As the mist cleared, it revealed a landscape of dense shadows. The shadows spread over red rock
and yellow vegetation and they were shadows of all shapes and dimensions, resembling all manner of
things. They seemed cast by the huge blood-colored sun which stood at perpetual noon above the island,
but what was disturbing about them was that the shadows themselves seemed without a source, as if the
objects they represented were invisible or existed elsewhere than on the island itself. The sky, too,
seemed full of these shadows, but whereas those on the island were still, those in the sky sometimes
moved, perhaps when the clouds moved. And all the while the red sun poured down its bloody light and
touched the twenty men with its unwelcome radiance just as it touched the land.
 And at times, as they advanced cautiously inland, a peculiar flickering light sometimes crossed the
island so that the outlines of the place became unsteady for a few seconds before returning to focus. Elric
suspected his eyes and said nothing until Hown Serpent-tamer (who was having difficulty finding his
land-legs) remarked:
 "I have rarely been ashore, it's true, but I think the quality of this land is stranger than any other I've
known. It shimmers. It distorts."
 Several voices agreed with him.
 "And from whence come all these shadows?" Ashnar the Lynx stared around him in unashamed
superstitious awe. "Why cannot we see that which casts them?"
 "It could be," Corum said, "that these are shadows cast by objects existing in other dimensions of
the Earth. If all dimensions meet here, as has been suggested, that could be a likely explanation." He put 
his silver hand to his embroidered eye-patch. "This is not the strangest example I have witnessed of such
a conjunction."
 "Likely?" Otto Blendker snorted. "Pray let none give me an unlikely explanation, if you please!"
 They pressed on through the shadows and the lurid light until they arrived at the outskirts of the
ruins.
 These ruins, thought Elric, had something in common with the ramshackle city of Ameeron, which
he had visited on his quest for the Black Sword. But they were altogether more vast-more a collection of
smaller cities, each one in a radically different architectural style.
 "Perhaps this is Tanelorn," said Corum, who had visited the place, "or, rather, all the versions of
Tanelorn there have ever been. For Tanelorn exists in many forms, each form depending upon the wishes
of those who most desire to find her."
 "This is not the Tanelorn I expected to find," said Hawkmoon bitterly.
 "Nor I," added Erekos bleakly.
 "Perhaps it is not Tanelorn," said Elric. "Perhaps it is not."
 "Or perhaps this is a graveyard," said Corum distantly, frowning with his single eye. "A graveyard
containing all the forgotten versions of that strange city."
 They began to clamber over the ruins, their arms clattering as they moved, heading for the center of
the place. Elric could tell by the introspective expressions in the faces of many of his companions that
they, like him, were wondering if this were not a dream. Why else should they find themselves in this
peculiar situation, unquestioningly risking their lives-perhaps their souls-in a fight with which none of
them was identified?
 Erekos moved closer to Elric as they marched. "Have you noticed," said he, "that the shadows now
represent something?"
 Elric nodded. "You can tell from the ruins what some of the buildings looked like when they were
whole. The shadows are the shadows of those buildings-the original buildings before they became
ruined."
 "Just so," said Erekos. Together, they shuddered.
 At last they approached the likely center of the place and here was a building which was not ruined.
It stood in a cleared space, all curves and ribbons of metal and glowing tubes.
 "It resembles a machine more than a building," said Hawkmoon.
 "And a musical instrument more than a machine," Corum mused.
 The party came to a halt, each group of four gathering about its leader. There was no question but
that they had arrived at their goal.
 Now that Elric looked carefully at the building he could see that it was in fact two buildings-both
absolutely identical and joined at various points by curling systems of pipes which might be connecting
corridors, though it was difficult to imagine what manner of being could utilize them.
 "Two buildings," said Erekos. "We were not prepared for this. Shall we split up and attack both?"
 Instinctively Elric felt that this action would be unwise. He shook his head. "I think we should go
together into one, else our strength will be weakened."
 "I agree," said Hawkmoon, and the rest nodded.
 Thus, there being no cover to speak of, they marched boldly toward the nearest building to a point
near the ground where a black opening of irregular proportions could be discerned. Ominously, there
was still no sign of defenders. The buildings pulsed and glowed and occasionally whispered, but that was
all.
 Elric and his party were the first to enter, finding themselves in a damp, warm passage which
curved almost immediately to the right. They were followed by the others until all stood in this passage
warily glaring ahead, expecting to be attacked. But no attack came.
 With Elric at their head, they moved on for some moments before the passage began to tremble
violently and sent Mown Serpent-tamer crashing to the floor cursing. As the man in the sea-green armor 
scrambled up, a voice began to echo along the passage, seemingly coming from a great distance yet
nonetheless loud and irritable.
 "Who? Who? Who?" shrieked the voice.
 "Who? Who? Who invades me?"
 The passage's tremble subsided a little into a constant quivering motion. The voice became a
muttering, detached and uncertain.
 "What attacks? What?"
 The twenty men glanced at one another in puzzlement. At length Elric shrugged and led the party
on and soon the passage had widened out into a hall whose walls, roof, and floor were damp with sticky
fluid and whose air was hard to breathe. And now, somehow passing themselves through the walls of
this hall, came the first of the defenders, ugly beasts who must be the servants of that mysterious brother
and sister Agak and Gagak.
 "Attack!" cried the distant voice. "Destroy this. Destroy it!"
 The beasts were of a primitive sort, mostly gaping mouth and slithering body, but there were many
of them oozing toward the twenty men, who quickly formed themselves into the four fighting units and
prepared to defend themselves. The creatures made a dreadful slushing sound as they approached and the
ridges of bone which served them as teeth clashed as they reared up to snap at Elric and his companions.
Elric whirled his sword and it met hardly any resistance as it sliced through several of the things at once.
But now the air was thicker than ever and a stench threatened to overwhelm them as fluid drenched the
floor.
 "Move on through them," Elric instructed, "hacking a path through as you go. Head for yonder
opening." He pointed with his left hand.
 And so they advanced, cutting back hundreds of the primitive beasts and thus decreasing the
breathability of the air.
 "The creatures are not hard to fight," gasped Hown Serpent-tamer, "but each one we kill robs us a
little of our own chances of life."
 Elric was aware of the irony. "Cunningly planned by our enemies, no doubt." He coughed and
slashed again at a dozen of the beasts slithering toward him. The things were fearless, but they were
stupid, too. They made no attempt at strategy.
 Finally Elric reached the next passage, where the air was slightly purer. He sucked gratefully at the
sweeter atmosphere and waved his companions on.
 Sword-arms rising and falling, they gradually retreated back into the passage, followed by only a
few of the beasts. The creatures seemed reluctant to enter the passage and Elric suspected that
somewhere within it there must lie a danger which even they feared. There was nothing for it, however,
but to press on and he was only grateful that all twenty had survived this initial ordeal.
 Gasping, they rested for a moment, leaning against the trembling walls of the passage, listening to
the tones of that distant voice, now muffled and indistinct.
 "I like not this castle at all," growled Brut of Lashmar, inspecting a rent in his cloak where a
creature had seized it. "High sorcery commands it."
 "It is only what we knew," Ashnar the Lynx reminded him, and Ashnar was plainly hard put to
control his terror. The fingerbones in his braids kept time with the trembling of the walls and the huge
barbarian looked almost pathetic as he steeled himself to go on.
 "They are cowards, these sorcerers," Otto Blendker said. "They do not show themselves." He raised
his voice. "Is their aspect so loathsome that they are afraid lest we look upon them?" It was a challenge
not taken up. As they pushed on through the passages there was no sign either of Agak or his sister
Gagak. It became gloomier and brighter in turns. Sometimes the passages narrowed so that it was
difficult to squeeze their bodies through, sometimes they widened into what were almost halls. Most of
the time they appeared to be climbing higher into the building.
 Elric tried to guess the nature of the building's inhabitants. There were no steps in the castle, no 
artifacts he could recognize. For no particular reason he developed an image of Agak and Gagak as
reptilian in form, for reptiles would prefer gently rising passages to steps and doubtless would have little
need of conventional furniture. There again it was possible that they could change their shape at will,
assuming human form when it suited them. He was becoming impatient to face either one or both of the
sorcerers.
 Ashnar the Lynx had other reasons-or so he said- for his own lack of patience.
 "They said there'd be treasure here," he muttered. "I thought to stake my life against a fair reward,
but there's naught here of value." He put a horny hand against the damp material of the wall. "Not even
stone or brick. What are these walls made of, Elric?"
 Elric shook his head. "That has puzzled me, also, Ashnar."
 Then Elric saw large, fierce eyes peering out of the gloom ahead. He heard a rattling noise, a
rushing noise, and the eyes grew larger and larger. He saw a red mouth, yellow fangs, orange fur. Then
the growling sounded and the beast sprang at him even as he raised Stormbringer to defend himself and
shouted a warning to the others. The creature was a baboon, but huge, and there were at least a dozen
others following the first. Elric drove his body forward behind his sword, taking the beast in its groin.
Claws reached out and dug into his shoulders and waist. He groaned as he felt at least one set of claws
draw blood. His arms were trapped and he could not pull Stormbringer free. All he could do was twist
the sword in the wound he had already made. With all his might, he turned the hilt. The great ape
shouted, its bloodshot eyes blazing, and it bared its yellow fangs as its muzzle shot toward Elric's throat.
The teeth closed on his neck, the stinking breath threatened to choke him. Again he twisted the blade.
Again the beast yelled in pain.
 The fangs were pressing into the metal of Elric's gorget, the only thing saving him from immediate
death. He struggled to free at least one arm, twisting the sword for the third time, then tugging it
sideways to widen the wound in the groin. The growls and groans of the baboon grew more intense and
the teeth tightened their hold on his neck, but now, mingled with the noises of the ape, he began to hear a
murmuring and he felt Stormbringer pulse in his hand. He knew that the sword was drawing power from
the ape even as the ape sought to destroy him. Some of that power began to flow into his body.
 Desperately Elric put all his remaining strength into dragging the sword across the ape's body,
slitting its belly wide so that its blood and entrails spilled over him as he was suddenly free and
staggering backward, wrenching the sword out in the same movement. The ape, too, was staggering
back, staring down in stupefied awe at its own horrible wound before it fell to the floor of the passage.
 Elric turned, ready to give aid to his nearest comrade, and he was in time to see Terndrik of
Hasghan die, kicking in the clutches of an even larger ape, his head bitten clean from his shoulders and
his red blood gouting.
 Elric drove Stormbringer cleanly between the shoulders of Terndrik's slayer, taking the ape in the
heart. Beast and human victim fell together. Two others were dead and several bore bad wounds, but the
remaining warriors fought on, swords and armor smeared with crimson. The narrow passage stank of
ape, of sweat, and of blood. Elric pressed into the fight, chopping at the skull of an ape which grappled
with Hown Serpent-tamer, who had lost his sword. Hown darted a look of thanks at Elric as he bent to
retrieve his blade and together they set upon the largest of all the baboons. This creature stood much
taller than Elric and had Erekos pressed against the wall, Erekos's sword through its shoulder.
 From two sides, Hown and Elric stabbed and the baboon snarled and screamed, turning to face the
new attackers, Erekos's blade quivering in its shoulder. It rushed upon them and they stabbed again
together, taking the monster in its heart and its lung so that when it roared at them blood vomited from
its mouth. It fell to its knees, its eyes dimming, then sank slowly down.
 And now there was silence in the passage and death lay all about them.
 Terndrik of Hasghan was dead. Two of Corum's party were dead. All of Erekos's surviving men
bore major wounds. One of Hawkmoon's men was dead, but the remaining three were virtually 
unscathed. Brut of Lashmar's helm was dented, but he was otherwise unwounded and Ashnar the Lynx
was disheveled, nothing more. Ashnar had taken two of the baboons during the fight. But now the
barbarian's eyes rolled as he leaned, panting, against the wall.
 "I begin to suspect this venture of being uneconomical," he said with a half-grin. He rallied himself,
stepping over a baboon's corpse to join Elric. "The less time we take over it, the better. What think you,
Elric?"
 "I would agree." Elric returned his grin. "Come." And he led the way through the passage and into a
chamber whose walls gave off a pinkish light. He had not walked far before he felt something catch at
his ankle and he stared down in horror to see a long, thin snake winding itself about his leg. It was too
late to use his sword; instead he seized the reptile behind its head and dragged it partially free of his leg
before hacking the head from the body. The others were now stamping and shouting warnings to each
other. The snakes did not appear to be venomous, but there were thousands of them, appearing, it
seemed, from out of the floor itself. They were flesh-colored and had no eyes, more closely resembling
earthworms than ordinary reptiles, but they were strong enough.
 Hown Serpent-tamer sang a strange song now, with many liquid, hissing notes, and this seemed to
have a calming effect upon the creatures. One by one at first and then in increasing numbers, they
dropped back to the floor, apparently sleeping. Mown grinned at his success.
 Elric said, "Now I understand how you came by your surname."
 "I was not sure the song would work on these," Hown told him, "for they are unlike any serpents I
have ever seen in the seas of my own world."
 They waded on through mounds of sleeping serpents, noticing that the next passage rose sharply. At
times they were forced to use their hands to steady themselves as they climbed the peculiar, slippery
material of the floor.
 It was much hotter in this passage and they were all sweating, pausing several times to rest and mop
their brows. The passage seemed to extend upward forever, turning occasionally, but never leveling out
for more than a few feet. At times it narrowed to little more than a tube through which they had to
squirm on their stomachs and at other times the roof disappeared into the gloom over their heads. Elric
had long since given up trying to relate their position to what he had seen of the outside of the castle.
From time to time small, shapeless creatures rushed toward them in shoals apparently with the intention
of attacking them, but these were rarely more than an irritation and were soon all but ignored by the
party as it continued its climb.
 For a while they had not heard the strange voice which had greeted them upon their entering, but
now it began to whisper again, its tones more urgent than before.
 "Where? Where? Oh, the pain!"
 They paused, trying to locate the source of the voice, but it seemed to come from everywhere at
once.
 Grim-faced, they continued, plagued by thousands of little creatures which bit at their exposed flesh
like so many gnats, yet the creatures were not insects. Elric had seen nothing like them before. They
were shapeless, primitive, and all but colorless. They battered at his face as he moved; they were like a
wind. Half-blinded, choked, sweating, he felt his strength leaving him. The air was so thick now, so hot,
so salty, it was as if he moved through liquid. The others were as badly affected as was he; some were
staggering and two men fell, to be helped up again by comrades almost as exhausted. Elric was tempted
to strip off his armor, but he knew this would leave more of his flesh to the mercy of the little flying
creatures.
 Still they climbed and now more of the serpentine things they had seen earlier began to writhe
around their feet, hampering them further, for all that Mown sang his sleeping song until he was hoarse.
 "We can survive this only a little longer," said Ashnar the Lynx, moving close to Elric. "We shall be
in no condition to meet the sorcerer if we ever find him or his sister."
 Elric nodded a gloomy head. "My thoughts, too, yet what else may we do, Ashnar?"
 "Nothing," said Ashnar in a low voice. "Nothing."
 "Where? Where? Where?" The word rustled all about them. Many of the party were becoming
openly nervous.
 V
 They had reached the top of the passage. The querulous voice was much louder now, but it
quavered more. They saw an archway and beyond the archway a lighted chamber.
 "Agak's room, without doubt," said Ashnar, taking a better grip on his sword.
 "Possibly," said Elric. He felt detached from his body. Perhaps it was the heat and the exhaustion,
or his growing sense of disquiet, but something made him withdraw into himself and hesitate before
entering the chamber.
 The place was octagonal and each of its eight sloping sides was of a different color and each color
changed constantly. Occasionally the walls became semitransparent, revealing a complete view of the
ruined city (or collection of cities) far below, and also a view of the twin castle to this one, still
connected by tubes and wires.
 It was the large pool in the center of the chamber which attracted their attention mostly. It seemed
deep and was full of evil-smelling, viscous stuff. It bubbled. Shapes formed in it. Grotesque and strange,
beautiful and familiar, the shapes seemed always upon the brink of taking permanent form before falling
back into the stuff of the pool. And the voice was still louder and there was no question now that it came
from the pool.
 "What? What? Who invades?"
 Elric forced himself closer to the pool and for a moment saw his own face staring out at him before
it melted.
 "Who invades? Ah! I am too weak!"
 Elric spoke to the pool. "We are of those you would destroy," he said. "We are those on whom you
would feed."
 "Ah! Agak! Agak! I am sick! Where are you?"
 Ashnar and Brut joined Elric. The faces of the warriors were filled with disgust.
 "Agak," growled Ashnar the Lynx, his eyes narrowing. "At last some sign that the sorcerer is here!"
 The others had all crowded in, to stand as far away from the pool as possible, but all stared,
fascinated by the variety of the shapes forming and disintegrating in the viscous liquid.
 "I weaken. . . . My energy needs to be replenished. . . . We must begin now, Agak. . . . It took us so
long to reach this place. I thought I could rest. But there is disease here. It fills my body. Agak. Awaken,
Agak. Awaken!"
 "Some servant of Agak's, charged with the defense of the chamber?" suggested Mown Serpenttamer
in a small voice.
 But Elric continued to stare into the pool as he began, he thought, to realize the truth.
 "Will Agak wake?" Brut said. "Will he come?" He glanced nervously around him.
 "Agak!" called Ashnar the Lynx. "Coward!"
 "Agak!" cried many of the other warriors, brandishing their swords.
 But Elric said nothing and he noted, too, that Hawkmoon and Corum and Erekos all remained
silent. He guessed that they must be filled with the same dawning understanding.
 He looked at them. In Erekos's eyes he saw an agony, a pity both for himself and his comrades.
 "We are the Four Who Are One," said Erekos. His voice shook.
 Elric was seized by an alien impulse, an impulse which disgusted and terrified him. "No. . . ." He
attempted to sheathe Stormbringer, but the sword refused to enter its scabbard.
 "Agak! Quickly!" said the voice from the pool.
 "If we do not do this thing," said Erekos, "they will eat all our worlds. Nothing will remain."
 Elric put his free hand to his head. He swayed upon the edge of that frightful pool. He moaned.
 "We must do it, then." Corum's voice was an echo.
 "I will not," said Elric. "I am myself."
 "And I!" said Hawkmoon.
 But Corum Jhaelen Irsei said, "It is the only way for us, for the single thing that we are. Do you not
see that? We are the only creatures of our worlds who possess the means of slaying the sorcerers-in the
only manner in which they can be slain!"
 Elric looked at Corum, at Hawkmoon, at Erekos, and again he saw something of himself in all of
them.
 "We are the Four Who Are One," said Erekos. "Our united strength is greater than the sum. We
must come together, brothers. We must conquer here before we can hope to conquer Agak."
 "No. . . ." Elric moved away, but somehow he found himself standing at a corner of the bubbling,
noxious pool from which the voice still murmured and complained, in which shapes still formed,
reformed, and faded. And at each of the other three corners stood one of his companions. All had a set,
fatalistic look to them.
 The warriors who had accompanied the Four drew back to the walls. Otto Blendker and Brut of
Lashmar stood near the doorway, listening for anything which might come up the passage to the
chamber. Ashnar the Lynx fingered the brand at his belt, a look of pure horror on his rugged features.
 Elric felt his arm begin to rise, drawn upward by his sword, and he saw that each of his three
companions were also lifting their swords. The swords reached out across the pool and their tips met
above the exact center.
 Elric yelled as something entered his being. Again he tried to break free, but the power was too
strong. Other voices spoke in his head.
 "I understand.. . ." This was Corum's distant murmur. "It is the only way."
 "Oh, no, no. . . ." And this was Hawkmoon, but the words came from Elric's lips.
 "Agak!" cried the pool. The stuff became more agitated, more alarmed. "Agak! Quickly! Wake!"
 Elric's body began to shake, but his hand kept a firm hold upon the sword. The atoms of his body
flew apart and then united again into a single flowing entity which traveled up the blade of the sword
toward the apex. And Elric was still Elric, shouting with the terror of it, sighing with the ecstasy of it.
 Elric was still Elric when he drew away from the pool and looked upon himself for a single
moment, seeing himself wholly joined with his three other selves.
 A being hovered over the pool. On each side of its head was a face and each face belonged to one of
the companions. Serene and terrible, the eyes did not blink. It had eight arms and the arms were still; it
squatted over the pool on eight legs, and its armor and accouterments were of all colors blending and at
the same time separate.
 The being clutched a single great sword in all eight hands and both he and the sword glowed with a
ghastly golden light.
 Then Elric had rejoined this body and had become a different thing-himself and three others and
something else which was the sum of that union.
 The Four Who Were One reversed its monstrous sword so that the point was directed downward at
the frenetically boiling stuff in the pool below. The stuff feared the sword. It mewled.
 "Agak, Agak...."
 The being of whom Elric was a part gathered its great strength and began to plunge the sword
down.
 Shapeless waves appeared on the surface of the pool. Its whole color changed from sickly yellow to
an unhealthy green. "Agak, I die...."
 Inexorably the sword moved down. It touched the surface.
 The pool swept back and forth; it tried to ooze over the sides and onto the floor. The sword bit
deeper and the Four Who Were One felt new strength flow up the blade. There came a moan; slowly the 
pool quieted. It became silent. It became still. It became gray.
 Then the Four Who Were One descended into the pool to be absorbed.
 It could see clearly now. It tested its body. It controlled every limb, every function. It had
triumphed; it had revitalized the pool. Through its single octagonal eye it looked in all directions at the
same time over the wide ruins of the city; then it focused all its attention upon its twin.
 Agak had awakened too late, but he was awakening at last, roused by the dying cries of his sister
Gagak, whose body the mortals had first invaded and whose intelligence they had overwhelmed, whose
eye they now used and whose powers they would soon attempt to utilize.
 Agak did not need to turn his head to look upon the being he still saw as his sister. Like hers, his
intelligence was contained within the huge eight-sided eye.
 "Did you call me, sister?"
 "I spoke your name, that is all, brother." There were enough vestiges of Gagak's life-force in the
Four Who Were One for it to imitate her manner of speaking.
 "You cried out?"
 "A dream." The Four paused and then it spoke again: "A disease. I dreamed that there was
something upon this island which made me unwell."
 "Is that possible? We do not know sufficient about these dimensions or the creatures inhabiting
them. Yet none is as powerful as Agak and Gagak. Fear not, sister. We must begin our work soon."
 "It is nothing. Now I am awake."
 Agak was puzzled. "You speak oddly."
 "The dream . . ." answered the creature which had entered Gagak's body and destroyed her.
 "We must begin," said Agak. "The dimensions turn and the time has come. Ah, feel it. It waits for
us to take it. So much rich energy. How we shall conquer when we go home!"
 "I feel it," replied the Four, and it did. It felt its whole universe, dimension upon dimension,
swirling all about it. Stars and planets and moons through plane upon plane, all full of the energy upon
which Agak and Gagak had desired to feed. And there was enough of Gagak still within the Four to
make the Four experience a deep, anticipatory hunger which, now that the dimensions attained the right
conjunction, would soon be satisfied.
 The Four was tempted to join with Agak and feast, though it knew if it did so it would rob its own
universe of every shred of energy. Stars would fade, worlds would die. Even the Lords of Law and
Chaos would perish, for they were part of the same universe. Yet to possess such power it might be
worth committing such a tremendous crime. ... It controlled this desire and gathered itself for its attack
before Agak became too wary.
 "Shall we feast, sister?"
 The Four realized that the ship had brought it to the island at exactly the proper moment. Indeed,
they had almost come too late.
 "Sister?" Agak was again puzzled. "What...?"
 The Four knew it must disconnect from Agak. The tubes and wires fell away from his body and
were withdrawn into Gagak's.
 "What's this?" Agak's strange body trembled for a moment. "Sister?"
 The Four prepared itself. For all that it had absorbed Gagak's memories and instincts, it was still not
confident that it would be able to attack Agak in her chosen form. And since the sorceress had possessed
the power to change her form, the Four began to change, groaning greatly, experiencing dreadful pain,
drawing all the materials of its stolen being together so that what had appeared to be a building now
became pulpy, unformed flesh. And Agak, stunned, looked on.
 "Sister? Your sanity..."
 The building, the creature that was Gagak, threshed, melted, and erupted. It screamed in agony.
 It attained its form.
 It laughed.
 Four faces laughed upon a gigantic head. Eight arms waved in triumph, eight legs began to move.
And over that head it waved a single, massive sword.
 And it was running.
 It ran upon Agak while the alien sorcerer was still in his static form. Its sword was whirling and
shards of ghastly golden light fell away from it as it moved, lashing the shadowed landscape. The Four
was as large as Agak. And at this moment it was as strong.
 But Agak, realizing his danger, began to suck. No longer would this be a pleasurable ritual shared
with his sister. He must suck at the energy of this universe if he were to find the strength to defend
himself, to gain what he needed to destroy his attacker, the slayer of his sister. Worlds died as Agak
sucked.
 But not enough. Agak tried cunning.
 "This is the center of your universe. All its dimensions intersect here. Come, you can share the
power. My sister is dead. I accept her death. You shall be my partner now. With this power we shall
conquer a universe far richer than this!"
 "No!" said the Four, still advancing.
 "Very well, but be assured of your defeat."
 The Four swung its sword. The sword fell upon the faceted eye within which Agak's intelligencepool
bubbled, just as his sister's had once bubbled. But Agak was stronger already and healed himself at
once.
 Agak's tendrils emerged and lashed at the Four and the Four cut at the tendrils as it sought his body.
And Agak sucked more energy to himself. His body, which the mortals had mistaken for a building,
began to glow burning scarlet and to radiate an impossible heat.
 The sword roared and flared so that black light mingled with the gold and flowed against the scarlet.
And all the while the Four could sense its own universe shrinking and dying.
 "Give back, Agak, what you have stolen!" said the Four.
 Planes and angles and curves, wires and tubes, flickered with deep red heat and Agak sighed. The
universe whimpered.
 "I am stronger than you," said Agak. "Now."
 And Agak sucked again.
 The Four knew that Agak's attention was diverted for just that short while as he fed. And the Four
knew that it, too, must draw energy from its own universe if Agak were to be defeated. So the sword was
raised.
 The sword was flung back, its blade slicing through tens of thousands of dimensions and drawing
their power to it. Then it began to swing back. It swung and black light bellowed from its blade. It swung
and Agak became aware of it. His body began to alter. Down toward the sorcerer's great eye, down
toward Agak's intelligence-pool swept the black blade.
 Agak's many tendrils rose to defend the sorcerer against the sword, but the sword cut through them
as if they were not there and it struck the eight-sided chamber which was Agak's eyes and it plunged on
down into Agak's intelligence-pool, deep into the stuff of the sorcerer's sensibility, drawing up Agak's
energy into itself and thence into its master, the Four Who Were One. And something screamed through
the universe and something sent a tremor through the universe. And the universe was dead, even as Agak
began to die.
 The Four did not dare wait to see if Agak were completely vanquished. It swept the sword out, back
through the dimensions, and everywhere the blade touched the energy was restored. The sword rang
round and round, round and round, dispersing the energy. And the sword sang its triumph and its glee.
 And little shreds of black and golden light whispered away and were reabsorbed.
 For a moment the universe had been dead. Now it lived and Agak's energy had been added to it.
 Agak lived, too, but he was frozen. He had attempted to change his shape. Now he still half-
resembled the building Elric had seen when he first came to the island, but part of him resembled the
Four Who Were One- here was part of Corum's face, here a leg, there a fragment of sword-blade-as if
Agak had believed, at the end, that the Four could only be defeated if its own form were assumed, just as
the Four had assumed Gagak's form.
 "We had waited so long. . . ." Agak sighed and then he was dead.
 And the Four sheathed its sword.
 Then there came a howling through the ruins of the many cities and a strong wind blustered against
the body of the Four so that it was forced to kneel on its eight legs and bow its four-faced head before the
gale. Then, gradually, it reassumed the shape of Gagak, the sorceress, and then it lay within Gagak's
stagnating intelligence-pool and then it rose over it, hovered for a moment, withdrew its sword from the
pool. Then four beings fled apart and Elric and Hawkmoon and Erekos and Corum stood with swordblades
touching over the center of the dead brain.
 The four men sheathed their swords. They stared for a second into each other's eyes and all saw
terror and awe there. Elric turned away.
 He could find neither thoughts nor emotions in him which would relate to what had happened.
There were no words he could use. He stood looking dumbly at Ashnar the Lynx and he wondered why
Ashnar giggled and chewed at his beard and scraped at the flesh of his own face with his fingernails, his
sword forgotten upon the floor of the gray chamber.
 "Now I have flesh again. Now I have flesh," Ashnar kept saying.
 Elric wondered why Mown Serpent-tamer lay curled in a ball at Ashnar's feet, and why when Brut
of Lashmar emerged from the passage he fell down and lay stretched upon the floor, stirring a little and
moaning as if in disturbed slumber. Otto Blendker came into the chamber. His sword was in its scabbard.
His eyes were tight shut and he hugged at himself, shivering.
 Elric thought to himself: I must forget all this or sanity will disappear forever.
 He went to Brut and helped the blond warrior to his feet. "What did you see?"
 "More than I deserved, for all my sins. We were trapped-trapped in that skull. . . ." Then Brut began
to weep as a small child might weep and Elric took the tall warrior in his own arms and stroked his head
and could not find words or sounds with which to comfort him.
 "We must go," said Erekos. His eyes were glazed. He staggered as he walked.
 Thus, dragging those who had fainted, leading those who had gone mad, leaving those who had
died behind, they fled through the dead passages of Gagak's body, no longer plagued by the things she
had created in her attempt to rid that body of those she had experienced as an invading disease. The
passages and chambers were cold and brittle and the men were glad when they stood outside and saw the
ruins, the sourceless shadows, the red, static sun.
 Otto Blendker was the only one of the warriors who seemed to retain his sanity through the ordeal,
when they had been absorbed, unknowingly, into the body of the Four Who Were One. He dragged his
brand from his belt and he took out his tinder and ignited it. Soon the brand was flaming and the others
lighted theirs from his. Elric trudged to where Agak's remains still lay and he shuddered as he recognized
in a monstrous stone face part of his own features. He felt that the stuff could not possibly burn, but it
did. Behind him Gagak's body blazed, too. They were swiftly consumed and pillars of growling fire
jutted into the sky, sending up a smoke of white and crimson which for a little while obscured the red
disk of the sun.
 The men watched the corpses burn.
 "I wonder," said Corum, "if the captain knew why he sent us here?"
 "Or if he suspected what would happen?" said Hawkmoon. Hawkmoon's tone was near to resentful.
 "Only we-only that being-could battle Agak and Gagak in anything resembling their own terms,"
said Erekos. "Other means would not have been successful, no other creature could have the particular
qualities, the enormous power needed to slay such strange sorcerers."
 "So it seems," said Elric, and he would talk no more of it.
 "Hopefully," said Corum, "you will forget this experience as you forgot-or will forget-the other."
 Elric offered him a hard stare. "Hopefully, brother," he said.
 Erekos's chuckle was ironic. "Who could recall that?" And he, too, said no more.
 Ashnar the Lynx, who had ceased his gigglings as he watched the fire, shrieked suddenly and broke
away from the main party. He ran toward the flickering column and then veered away, disappearing
among the ruins and the shadows.
 Otto Blendker gave Elric a questioning stare, but Elric shook his head. "Why follow him? What can
we do for him?" He looked down at Hown Serpent-tamer. He had particularly liked the man in the seagreen
armor. He shrugged.
 When they moved on, they left the curled body of Hown Serpent-tamer where it lay, helping only
Brut of Lashmar across the rubble and down to the shore.
 Soon they saw the white mist ahead and knew they neared the sea, though the ship was not in sight.
 At the edge of the mist both Hawkmoon and Erekos paused.
 "I will not rejoin the ship," said Hawkmoon. "I feel I've served my passage now. If I can find
Tanelorn, this, I suspect, is where I must look."
 "My own feelings." Erekos nodded his head.
 Elric looked to Corum. Corum smiled. "I have already found Tanelorn. I go back to the ship in the
hope that soon it will deposit me upon a more familiar shore."
 "That is my hope," said Elric. His arm still supported Brut of Lashmar.
 Brut whispered, "What was it? What happened to us?"
 Elric increased his grip upon the warrior's shoulder. "Nothing," he said.
 Then, as Elric tried to lead Brut into the mist, the blond warrior stepped back, breaking free. "I will
stay," he said. He moved away from Elric. "I am sorry."
 Elric was puzzled. "Brut?"
 "I am sorry," Brut said again. "I fear you. I fear that ship."
 Elric made to follow the warrior, but Corum put a hard silver hand upon his shoulder. "Comrade, let
us be gone from this place." His smile was bleak. "It is what is back there that I fear more than the ship."
 They stared over the ruins. In the distance they could see the remains of the fire and there were two
shadows there now, the shadows of Gagak and Agak as they had first appeared to them.
 Elric drew a cold breath of air. "With that I agree," he told Corum.
 Otto Blendker was the only warrior who chose to return to the ship with them. "If that is Tanelorn,
it is not, after all, the place I sought," he said.
 Soon they were waist-deep in the water. They saw again the outlines of the dark ship; they saw the
captain leaning on the rail, his arm raised as if in salute to someone or something upon the island.
 "Captain," called Corum, "we come aboard."
 "You are welcome," said the captain. "Yes, you are welcome." The blind face turned toward them
as Elric reached out for the rope ladder. "Would you care to sail for a while into the silent places, the
restful places?"
 "I think so," said Elric. He paused, halfway up the ladder, and he touched his head. "I have many
wounds."
 He reached the rail and with his own cool hands the captain helped him over. "They will heal,
Elric."
 Elric moved closer to the mast. He leaned against it and watched the silent crew as they unfurled the
sail. Corum and Otto Blendker came aboard. Elric listened to the sharp sound of the anchor as it was
drawn up. The ship swayed a little.
 Otto Blendker looked at Elric, then at the captain, then he turned and went into his cabin, saying
nothing at all as he closed the door.
 The sail filled, the ship began to move. The captain reached out and found Elric's arm. He took
Corum's arm, too, and led them toward his cabin. "The wine," he said. "It will heal all the wounds."
 At the door of the captain's cabin Elric paused. "And does the wine have other properties?" he
asked. "Does it cloud a man's reason? Was it that which made me accept your commission, Captain?"
 The captain shrugged. "What is reason?"
 The ship was gathering speed. The white mist was thicker and a cold wind blew at the rags of cloth
and metal Elric wore. He sniffed, thinking for a moment that he smelled smoke upon that wind.
 He put his two hands to his face and touched his flesh. His face was cold. He let his hands fall to his
sides and he followed the captain into the warmth of the cabin.
 The captain poured wine into silver cups from his silver jug. He stretched out a hand to offer a cup
to Elric and to Corum. They drank.
 A little later the captain said, "How do you feel?"
Elric said, "I feel nothing."
 And that night he dreamed only of shadows and in the morning he could not understand his dream
at all.


 Book TWO

 SAILING TO THE PRESENT

 I
 His bone-white, long-fingered hand upon a carved demon's head in black-brown hardwood (one of
the few such decorations to be found anywhere about the vessel), the tall man stood alone in the ship's
fo'c'sle and stared through large, slanting crimson eyes at the mist into which they moved with a speed
and sureness to make any mortal mariner marvel and become incredulous.
 There were sounds in the distance, incongruent with the sounds of even this nameless, tuneless sea:
thin sounds, agonized and terrible, for all that they remained remote-yet the ship followed them, as if
drawn by them; they grew louder-pain and despair were there, but terror was predominant.
 Elric had heard such sounds echoing from his cousin Yyrkoon's sardonically named "Pleasure
Chambers" in the days before he had fled the responsibilities of ruling all that remained of the old
Melnibonan Empire. These were the voices of men whose very souls were under siege; men to whom
death meant not mere extinction, but a continuation of existence, forever in thrall to some cruel and
supernatural master. He had heard men cry so when his salvation and his nemesis, his great black battleblade
Stormbringer, drank their souls.
 He did not savor the sound: he hated it, turned his back away from the source and was about to
descend the ladder to the main deck when he realized that Otto Blendker had come up behind him. Now
that Corum had been borne off by friends with chariots which could ride upon the surface of the water,
Blendker was the last of those comrades to have fought at Elric's side against the two alien sorcerers
Gagak and Agak.
 Blendker's black, scarred face was troubled. The ex-scholar, turned hireling sword, covered his ears
with his huge palms.
 "Ach! By the Twelve Symbols of Reason, Elric, who makes that din? It's as though we sail close to
the shores of Hell itself!"
 Prince Elric of Melnibon shrugged. "I'd be prepared to forego an answer and leave my curiosity
unsatisfied, Master Blendker, if only our ship would change course. As it is, we sail closer and closer to
the source."
 Blendker grunted his agreement. "I've no wish to encounter whatever it is that causes those poor
fellows to scream so! Perhaps we should inform the captain."
 "You think he does not know where his own ship sails?" Elric's smile had little humor.
 The tall black man rubbed at the inverted V-shaped scar which ran from his forehead to his
jawbones. "I wonder if he plans to put us into battle again."
 "I'll not fight another for him." Elric's hand moved from the carved rail to the pommel of his
runesword. "I have business of my own to attend to, once I'm back on real land."
 A wind came from nowhere. There was a sudden rent in the mist. Now Elric could see that the ship
sailed through rust-colored water. Peculiar lights gleamed in that water, just below the surface. There
was an impression of creatures moving ponderously in the depths of the ocean and, for a moment, Elric
thought he glimpsed a white, bloated face not dissimilar to his own-a Melnibonan face. Impulsively he
whirled, back to the rail, looking past Blendker as he strove to control the nausea in his throat.
 For the first time since he had come aboard the Dark Ship he was able clearly to see the length of
the vessel. Here were the two great wheels, one beside him on the foredeck, one at the far end of the ship
on the reardeck, tended now as always by the steersman, the captain's sighted twin. There was the great
mast bearing the taut black sail, and fore and aft of this, the two deck cabins, one of which was entirely
empty (its occupants having been killed during their last landfall) and one of which was occupied only
by himself and Blendker. Elric's gaze was drawn back to the steersman and not for the first time the
albino wondered how much influence the captain's twin had over the course of the Dark Ship. The man
seemed tireless, rarely, to Elric's knowledge, going below to his quarters, which occupied the stern deck
as the captain's occupied the foredeck. Once or twice Elric or Blendker had tried to involve the
steersman in conversation, but he appeared to be as dumb as his brother was blind.
 The cryptographic, geometrical carvings covering all the ship's wood and most of its metal, from
sternpost to figurehead, were picked out by the shreds of pale mist still clinging to them (and again Elric
wondered if the ship actually generated the mist normally surrounding it) and, as he watched, the designs
slowly turned to pale pink fire as the light from that red star, which forever followed them, permeated the
overhead cloud.
 A noise from below. The captain, his long red-gold hair drifting in a breeze which Elric could not
feel, emerged from his cabin. The captain's circlet of blue jade, worn like a diadem, had turned to
something of a violet shade in the pink light, and even his buff-colored hose and tunic reflected the hueeven
the silver sandals with their silver lacing glittered with the rosy tint.
 Again Elric looked upon that mysterious blind face, as unhuman, in the accepted sense, as his own,
and puzzled upon the origin of the one who would allow himself to be called nothing but "Captain."
 As if at the captain's summons, the mist drew itself about the ship again, as a woman might draw a
froth of furs about her body. The red star's light faded, but the distant screams continued.
 Did the captain notice the screams now for the first time, or was this a pantomime of surprise? His
blind head tilted, a hand went to his ear. He murmured in a tone of satisfaction, "Aha!" The head lifted.
"Elric?"
 "Here," said the albino. "Above you."
 "We are almost there, Elric."
 The apparently fragile hand found the rail of the companionway. The captain began to climb.
 Elric faced him at the top of the ladder. "If it's a battle..."
 The captain's smile was enigmatic, bitter. "It was a fight-or shall be one."
 ". . . we'll have no part of it," concluded the albino firmly.
 "It is not one of the battles in which my ship is directly involved," the blind man reassured him.
"Those whom you can hear are the vanquished-lost in some future which, I think, you will experience
close to the end of your present incarnation."
 Elric waved a dismissive hand. "I'll be glad, Captain, if you would cease such vapid mystification.
I'm weary of it."
 "I'm sorry it offends you. I answer literally, according to my instincts."
 The captain, going past Elric and Otto Blendker so that he could stand at the rail, seemed to be
apologizing. He said nothing for a while, but listened to the disturbing and confused babble from the 
mist. Then he nodded, apparently satisfied.
 "We'll sight land shortly. If you would disembark and seek your own world, I should advise you to
do so now. This is the closest we shall ever come again to your plane."
 Elric let his anger show. He cursed, invoking Arioch's name, and put a hand upon the blind man's
shoulder. "What? You cannot return me directly to my own plane?"
 "It is too late." The captain's dismay was apparently genuine. "The ship sails on. We near the end of
our long voyage."
 "But how shall I find my world? I have no sorcery great enough to move me between the spheres!
And demonic assistance is denied me here."
 "There is one gateway to your world," the captain told him. "That is why I suggest you disembark.
Elsewhere there are none at all. Your sphere and this one intersect directly."
 "But you say this lies in my future."
 "Be sure-you will return to your own time. Here you are timeless. It is why your memory is so poor.
It is why you remember so little of what befalls you. Seek for the gateway-it is crimson and it emerges
from the sea off the coast of the island."
 "Which island?"
 "The one we approach."
 Elric hesitated. "And where shall you go, when I have landed?"
 "To Tanelorn," said the captain. "There is something I must do there. My brother and I must
complete our destiny. We carry cargo as well as men. Many will try to stop us now, for they fear our
cargo. We might perish, but yet we must do all we can to reach Tanelorn."
 "Was that not, then, Tanelorn, where we fought Agak and Gagak?"
 "That was nothing more than a broken dream of Tanelorn, Elric."
 The Melnibonan knew that he would receive no more information from the captain.
 "You offer me a poor choice-to sail with you into danger and never see my own world again, or to
risk landing on yonder island inhabited, by the sound of it, by the damned and those which prey upon the
damned!"
 The captain's blind eyes moved in Elric's direction. "I know," he said softly. "But it is the best I can
offer you, nonetheless."
 The screams, the imploring, terrified shouts, were closer now, but there were fewer of them.
Glancing over the side, Elric thought he saw a pair of armored hands rising from the water; there was
foam, red-flecked and noxious, and there was yellowish scum in which pieces of frightful flotsam
drifted; there were broken timbers, scraps of canvas, tatters of flags and clothing, fragments of weapons,
and, increasingly, there were floating corpses.
 "But where was the battle?" Blendker whispered, fascinated and horrified by the sight.
 "Not on this plane," the captain told him. "You see only the wreckage which has drifted over from
one world to another."
 "Then it was a supernatural battle?"
 The captain smiled again. "I am not omniscient. But, yes, I believe there were supernatural agencies
involved. The warriors of half a world fought in the sea-battle-to decide the fate of the multiverse. It is-or
will be-one of the decisive battles to determine the fate of Mankind, to fix Man's destiny for the coming
Cycle."
 "Who were the participants?" asked Elric, voicing the question in spite of his resolve. "What were
the issues as they understood them?"
 "You will know in time, I think." The captain's head faced the sea again.
 Blendker sniffed the air. "Ach! It's foul!"
 Elric, too, found the odor increasingly unpleasant. Here and there now the water was lighted by
guttering fires which revealed the faces of the drowning, some of whom still managed to cling to pieces
of blackened driftwood. Not all the faces were human (though they had the appearance of having, once, 
been human): Things with the snouts of pigs and of bulls raised twisted hands to the Dark Ship and
grunted plaintively for succor, but the captain ignored them and the steersman held his course.
 Fires spluttered and water hissed; smoke mingled with the mist. Elric had his sleeve over his mouth
and nose and was glad that the smoke and mist between them helped obscure the sights, for as the
wreckage grew thicker not a few of the corpses he saw reminded him more of reptiles than of men, their
pale, lizard bellies spilling something other than blood.
 "If that is my future," Elric told the captain, "I've a mind to remain on board, after all."
 "You have a duty, as have I," said the captain quietly. "The future must be served, as much as the
past and the present."
 Elric shook his head. "I fled the duties of an empire because I sought freedom," the albino told him.
"And freedom I must have."
 "No," murmured the captain. "There is no such thing. Not yet. Not for us. We must go through
much more before we can even begin to guess what freedom is. The price for the knowledge alone is
probably higher than any you would care to pay at this stage of your life. Indeed, life itself is often the
price."
 "I also sought release from metaphysics when I left Melnibon," said Elric. "I'll get the rest of my
gear and take the land that's offered. With luck this Crimson Gate will be quickly found and I'll be back
among dangers and torments which will, at least, be familiar."
 "It is the only decision you could have made." The captain's blind head turned toward Blendker.
"And you, Otto Blendker? What shall you do?"
 "Elric's world is not mine and I like not the sound of those screams. What can you promise me, sir,
if I sail on with you?"
 "Nothing but a good death." There was regret in the captain's voice.
 "Death is the promise we're all born with, sir. A good death is better than a poor one. I'll sail on with
you."
 "As you like. I think you're wise." The captain sighed. "I'll say farewell to you, then, Elric of
Melnibon. You fought well in my service and I thank you."
 "Fought for what?" Elric asked.
 "Oh, call it Mankind. Call it Fate. Call it a dream or an ideal, if you wish."
 "Shall I never have a clearer answer?"
 "Not from me. I do not think there is one."
 "You allow a man little faith." Elric began to descend the companionway.
 "There are two kinds of faith, Elric. Like freedom, there is a kind which is easily kept but proves
not worth the keeping, and there is a kind which is hard-won. I agree, I offer little of the former."
 Elric strode toward his cabin. He laughed, feeling genuine affection for the blind man at that
moment. "I thought I had a penchant for such ambiguities, but I have met my match in you, Captain."
 He noticed that the steersman had left his place at the wheel and was swinging out a boat on its
davits, preparatory to lowering it.
 "Is that for me?"
 The steersman nodded.
 Elric ducked into his cabin. He was leaving the ship with nothing but that which he had brought
aboard, only his clothing and his armor were in a poorer state of repair than they had been, and his mind
was in a considerably greater state of confusion.
 Without hesitation he gathered up his things, drawing his heavy cloak about him, pulling on his
gauntlets, fastening buckles and thongs, then he left the cabin and returned to the deck. The captain was
pointing through the mist at the dark outlines of a coast. "Can you see land, Elric?"
 "I can."
 "You must go quickly, then."
 "Willingly."
 Elric swung himself over the rail and into the boat. The boat struck the side of the ship several
times, so that the hull boomed like the beating of some huge funeral drum. Otherwise there was silence
now upon the misty waters and no sign of wreckage.
 Blendker saluted him. "I wish you luck, comrade."
 "You, too, Master Blendker."
 The boat began to sink toward the flat surface of the sea, the pulleys of the davits creaking. Elric
clung to the rope, letting go as the boat hit the water. He stumbled and sat down heavily upon the seat,
releasing the ropes so that the boat drifted at once away from the Dark Ship. He got out the oars and
fitted them into their rowlocks.
 As he pulled toward the shore he heard the captain's voice calling to him, but the words were
muffled by the mist and he would never know, now, if the blind man's last communication had been a
warning or merely some formal pleasantry. He did not care. The boat moved smoothly through the
water; the mist began to thin, but so, too, did the light fade.
 Suddenly he was under a twilight sky, the sun already gone and stars appearing. Before he had
reached the shore it was already completely dark, with the moon not yet risen, and it was with difficulty
that he beached the boat on what seemed flat rocks, and stumbled inland until he judged himself safe
enough from any inrushing tide.
 Then, with a sigh, he lay down, thinking just to order his thoughts before moving on; but, almost
instantly, he was asleep.


 II

 Elric dreamed.
 He dreamed not merely of the end of his world but of the end of an entire cycle in the history of the
cosmos. He dreamed that he was not only Elric of Melnibon but that he was other men, too-men who
were pledged to some numinous cause which even they could not describe. And he dreamed that he had
dreamed of the Dark Ship and Tanelorn and Agak and Gagak while he lay exhausted upon a beach
somewhere beyond the borders of Pikarayd; and when he woke up he was smiling sardonically,
congratulating himself for the possession of a grandiose imagination. But he could not clear his head
entirely of the impression left by that dream.
 This shore was not the same, so plainly something had befallen him-perhaps he had been drugged
by slavers, then later abandoned when they found him not what they expected. . . . But, no, the
explanation would not do. If he could discover his whereabouts, he might also recall the true facts.
 It was dawn, for certain. He sat up and looked about him.
 He was sprawled upon a dark, sea-washed limestone pavement, cracked in a hundred places, the
cracks so deep that the small streams of foaming salt water rushing through these many narrow channels
made raucous what would otherwise have been a very still morning.
 Elric climbed to his feet, using his scabbarded rune-sword to steady himself. His bone-white lids
closed for a moment over his crimson eyes as he sought, again, to recollect the events which had brought
him here.
 He recalled his flight from Pikarayd, his panic, his falling into a coma of hopelessness, his dreams.
And, because he was evidently neither dead nor a prisoner, he could at least conclude that his pursuers
had, after all, given up the chase, for if they had found him they would have killed him.
 Opening his eyes and casting about him, he remarked the peculiar blue quality of the light
(doubtless a trick of the sun behind the gray clouds) which made the landscape ghastly and gave the sea
a dull, metallic look.
 The limestone terraces which rose from the sea and stretched above him shone intermittently, like 
polished lead. On an impulse he held his hand to the light and inspected it. The normally lusterless white
of his skin was now tinged with a faint, bluish luminosity. He found it pleasing and smiled as a child
might smile, in innocent wonder.
 He had expected to be tired, but he now realized that he felt unusually refreshed, as if he had slept
long after a good meal, and, deciding not to question the fact of this fortunate (and unlikely) gift, he
determined to climb the cliffs in the hope that he might get some idea of his bearings before he decided
which direction he would take.
 Limestone could be a little treacherous, but it made easy climbing, for there was almost always
somewhere that one terrace met another.
 He climbed carefully and steadily, finding many footholds, and seemed to gain considerable height
quite quickly, yet it was noon before he had reached the top and found himself standing at the edge of a
broad, rocky plateau which fell away sharply to form a close horizon. Beyond the plateau was only the
sky. Save for sparse, brownish grass, little grew here and there were no signs at all of human habitation.
It was now, for the first time, that Elric realized the absence of any form of wildlife. Not a single seabird
flew in the air, not an insect crept through the grass. Instead, there was an enormous silence hanging over
the brown plain.
 Elric was still remarkably untired, so he decided to make the best use he could of his energy and
reach the edge of the plateau in the hope that, from there, he would sight a town or a village. He pressed
on, feeling no lack of food and water, and his stride was singularly energetic, still; but he had misjudged
his distance and the sun had begun to set well before his journey to the edge was completed. The sky on
all sides turned a deep, velvety blue and the few clouds that there were in it were also tinged blue, and
now, for the first time, Elric realized that the sun itself was not its normal shade, that it burned blackish
purple, and he wondered again if he still dreamed.
 The ground began to rise sharply and it was with some effort that he walked, but before the light
had completely faded he was on the steep flank of a hill, descending toward a wide valley which, though
bereft of trees, contained a river which wound through rocks and russet turf and bracken.
 After a short rest, Elric decided to press on, although night had fallen, and see if he could reach the
river where he might at least drink and, possibly, in the morning find fish to eat.
 Again, no moon appeared to aid his progress and he walked for two or three hours in a darkness
which was almost total, stumbling occasionally into large rocks, until the ground leveled and he felt sure
he had reached the floor of the valley.
 He had developed a strong thirst by now and was feeling somewhat hungry, but decided that it
might be best to wait until morning before seeking the river when, rounding a particularly tall rock, he
saw, with some astonishment, the light of a camp fire.
 Hopefully this would be the fire of a company of merchants, a trading caravan on its way to some
civilized country which would allow him to travel with it, perhaps in return for his services as a
mercenary swordsman (it would not be the first time, since he had left Melnibon, that he had earned his
bread in such a way).
 Yet Elric's old instincts did not desert him; he approached the fire cautiously and let no one see him.
Beneath an overhang of rock, made shadowy by the flame's light, he stood and observed the group of
fifteen or sixteen men who sat or lay close to the fire, playing some kind of game involving dice and
slivers of numbered ivory.
 Gold, bronze, and silver gleamed in the firelight as the men staked large sums on the fall of a dice
and the turn of a slip of ivory.
 Elric guessed that, if they had not been so intent on their game, these men must certainly have
detected his approach, for they were not, after all, merchants. By the evidence, they were warriors,
wearing scarred leather and dented metal, their weapons ready to hand, yet they belonged to no armyunless
it be an army of bandits- for they were of all races and (oddly) seemed to be from various periods
in the history of the Young Kingdoms.
 It was as if they had looted some scholar's collection of relics. An axman of the later Lormyrian
Republic, which had come to an end some two hundred years ago, lay with his shoulder rubbing the
elbow of a Chalalite bowman, from a period roughly contemporary with Elric's own. Close to the
Chalalite sat a short Ilmioran infantryman of a century past. Next to him was a Filkharian in the barbaric
dress of that nation's earliest times. Tarkeshites, Shazarians, Vilmirians, all mingled and the only thing
they had in common, by the look of them, was a villainous, hungry cast to their features.
 In other circumstances Elric might have skirted this encampment and moved on, but he was so glad
to find human beings of any sort that he ignored the disturbing incongruities of the group; yet he
remained content to watch them.
 One of the men, less unwholesome than the others, was a bulky, black-bearded, baldheaded seawarrior
clad in the casual leathers and silks of the people of the Purple Towns. It was when this man
produced a large gold Melnibonan wheel-a coin not minted, as most coins, but carved by craftsmen to a
design both ancient and intricate-that Elric's caution was fully conquered by his curiosity.
 Very few of those coins existed in Melnibon and none, that Elric had heard of, outside; for the
coins were not used for trade with the Young Kingdoms. They were prized, even by the nobility of
Melnibon.
 It seemed to Elric that the baldheaded man could only have acquired the coin from another
Melnibonan traveler-and Elric knew of no other Melnibonans who shared his penchant for exploration.
His wariness dismissed, he stepped into the circle.
 If he had not been completely obsessed by the thought of the Melnibonan wheel he might have
taken some satisfaction in the sudden scuffle to arms which resulted. Within seconds, the majority of the
men were on their feet, their weapons drawn.
 For a moment, the gold wheel was forgotten. His hand upon his runesword's pommel, he presented
the other in a placatory gesture.
 "Forgive the interruption, gentlemen. I am but one tired fellow soldier who seeks to join you. I
would beg some information and purchase some food, if you have it to spare."
 On foot, the warriors had an even more ruffianly appearance. They grinned among themselves,
entertained by Elric's courtesy but not impressed by it.
 One, in the feathered helmet of a Pan Tangian sea-chief, with features to match-swarthy, sinisterpushed
his head forward on its long neck and said banteringly:
 "We've company enough, white-face. And few here are overfond of the man-demons of Melnibon.
You must be rich."
 Elric recalled the animosity with which Melnibonans were regarded in the Young Kingdoms,
particularly by those from Pan Tang who envied the Dragon Isle her power and her wisdom and, of late,
had begun crudely to imitate Melnibon.
 Increasingly on his guard, he said evenly, "I have a little money."
 "Then we'll take it, demon." The Pan Tangian presented a dirty palm just below Elric's nose as he
growled, "Give it over and be on your way."
 Elric's smile was polite and fastidious, as if he had been told a poor joke. .
 The Pan Tangian evidently thought the joke better than did Elric, for he laughed heartily and looked
to his nearest fellows for approval.
 Coarse laughter infected the night and only the bald-headed, black-bearded man did not join in the
jest, but took a step or two backward, while all the others pressed forward.
 The Pan Tangian's face was close to Elric's own; his breath was foul and Elric saw that his beard
and hair were alive with lice, yet he kept his head, replying in the same equable tone:
 "Give me some decent food, a flask of water-some wine, if you have it-and I'll gladly give you the
money I have."
 The laughter rose and fell again as Elric continued:
 "But if you would take my money and leave me with naught-then I must defend myself. I have a 
good sword."
 The Pan Tangian strove to imitate Elric's irony. "But you will note, Sir Demon, that we outnumber
you. Considerably."
 Softly the albino spoke: "I've noticed that fact, but I'm not disturbed by it," and he had drawn the
black blade even as he finished speaking, for they had come at him with a rush.
 And the Pan Tangian was the first to die, sliced through the side, his vertebrae sheared, and
Stormbringer, having taken its first soul, began to sing.
 A Chalalite died next, leaping with stabbing javelin poised, on the point of the runesword, and
Stormbringer murmured with pleasure.
 But it was not until it had sliced the head clean off a Filkharian pike-master that the sword began to
croon and come fully to life, black fire flickering up and down its length, its strange runes glowing.
 Now the warriors knew they battled sorcery and became more cautious, yet they scarcely paused in
their attack, and Elric, thrusting and parrying, hacking and slicing, needed all of the fresh, dark energy
the sword passed on to him.
 Lance, sword, ax, and dirk were blocked, wounds were given and received, but the dead had not yet
outnumbered the living when Elric found himself with his back against the rock and nigh a dozen sharp
weapons seeking his vitals.
 It was at this point, when Elric had become somewhat less than confident that he could best so
many, that the baldheaded warrior, ax in one gloved hand, sword in the other, came swiftly into the
firelight and set upon those of his fellows closest to him.
 "I thank you, sir!" Elric was able to shout, during the short respite this sudden turn produced. His
morale improved, he resumed the attack.
 The Lormyrian was cleaved from hip to pelvis as he dodged a feint; a Filkharian, who should have
been dead four hundred years before, fell with the blood bubbling from lips and nostrils, and the corpses
began to pile one upon the other. Still Stormbringer sang its sinister battle-song and still the runesword
passed its power to its master so that with every death Elric found strength to slay more of the soldiers.
 Those who remained now began to express their regret for their hasty attack. Where oaths and
threats had issued from their mouths, now came plaintive petitions for mercy and those who had laughed
with such bold braggadocio now wept like young girls, but Elric, full of his old battle-joy, spared none.
 Meanwhile the man from the Purple Towns, unaided by sorcery, put ax and sword to good work
and dealt with three more of his one-time comrades, exulting in his work as if "he had nursed a taste for
it for some time.
 "Yoi! But this is worthwhile slaughter!" cried the black-bearded one.
 And then that busy butchery was suddenly done and Elric realized that none were left save himself
and his new ally, who stood leaning on his ax, panting and grinning like a hound at the kill, replacing a
steel skullcap upon his pate from where it had fallen during the fight, and wiping a bloody sleeve over
the sweat glistening on his brow, and saying, in a deep, good-humored tone:
 "Well, now, it is we who are wealthy, of a sudden."
 Elric sheathed a Stormbringer still reluctant to return to its scabbard. "You desire their gold. Is that
why you aided me?"
 The black-bearded soldier laughed. "I owed them a debt and had been biding my time, waiting to
pay. These rascals are all that were left of a pirate crew which slew everyone aboard my own ship when
we wandered into strange waters-they would have slain me had I not told them I wished to join them.
Now I am revenged. Not that I am above taking the gold, since much of it belongs to me and my dead
brothers. It will go to their wives and their children when I return to the Purple Towns."
 "How did you convince them not to kill you, too?" Elric sought among the ruins of the fire for
something to eat. He found some cheese and began to chew upon it.
 "They had no captain or navigator, it seemed. None were real sailors at all, but coast-huggers, based 
upon this island. They were stranded here, you see, and had taken to piracy as a last resort, but were too
terrified to risk the open sea. Besides, after the fight, they had no ship. We had managed to sink that as
we fought. We sailed mine to this shore, but provisions were already low and they had no stomach for
setting sail without full holds, so I pretended that I knew this coast (may the gods take my soul if I ever
see it again after this business) and offered to lead them inland to a village they might loot. They had
heard of no such village, but believed me when I said it lay in a hidden valley. That way I prolonged my
life while I waited for the opportunity to be revenged upon them. It was a foolish hope, I know. Yet"-
grinning-"as it happened, it was well-founded, after all! Eh?"
 The black-bearded man glanced a little warily at Elric, uncertain of what the albino might say,
hoping, however, for comradeship, though it was well known how haughty Melnibonans were. Elric
could tell that all these thoughts went through his new acquaintance's mind; he had seen many others
make similar calculations. So he smiled openly and slapped the man on the shoulder.
 "You saved my life, also, my friend. We are both fortunate."
 The man sighed in relief and slung his ax upon his back. "Aye-lucky's the word. But shall our luck
hold, I wonder?"
 "You do not know the island at all?"
 "Nor the waters, either. How we came to them I'll never guess. Enchanted waters, though, without
question. You've seen the color of the sun?"
 "I have."
 "Well"-the seaman bent to remove a pendant from around the Pan Tangian's throat-"you'd know
more about enchantments and sorceries than I. How came you here, Sir Melnibonan?"
 "I know not. I fled from some who hunted me. I came to a shore and could flee no further. Then I
dreamed a great deal. When next I awoke I was on the shore again, but of this island."
 "Spirits of some sort-maybe friendly to you-took you to safety, away from your enemies."
 "That's just possible," Elric agreed, "for we have many allies among the elementals. I am called
Elric and I am self-exiled from Melnibon. I travel because I believe I have something to learn from the
folk of the Young Kingdoms. I have no power, save what you see...."
 The black-bearded man's eyes narrowed in appraisal as he pointed at himself with his thumb. "I'm
Smiorgan Baldhead, once a sea-lord of the Purple Towns. I commanded a fleet of merchantmen. Perhaps
I still do. I shall not know until I return-if I ever do return."
 "Then let us pool our knowledge and our resources, Smiorgan Baldhead, and make plans to leave
this island as soon as we can."
 Elric walked back to where he saw traces of the abandoned game, trampled into the mud and the
blood. From among the dice and the ivory slips, the silver and the bronze coins, he found the gold
Melnibonan wheel. He picked it up and held it in his outstretched palm. The wheel almost covered the
whole palm. In the old days, it had been the currency of kings.
 "This was yours, friend?" he asked Smiorgan.
 Smiorgan Baldhead looked up from where he was still searching the Pan Tangian for his stolen
possessions. He nodded.
 "Aye. Would you keep it as part of your share?"
 Elric shrugged. "I'd rather know from whence it came. Who gave it you?"
 "It was not stolen. It's Melnibonan, then?"
 "Yes."
 "I guessed it."
 "From whom did you obtain it?"
 Smiorgan straightened up, having completed his search. He scratched at a slight wound on his
forearm. "It was used to buy passage on our ship-before we were lost- before the raiders attacked us."
 "Passage? By a Melnibonan?"
 "Maybe," said Smiorgan. He seemed reluctant to speculate.
 "Was he a warrior?"
 Smiorgan smiled in his beard. "No. It was a woman gave that to me."
 "How came she to take passage?"
 Smiorgan began to pick up the rest of the money. "It's a long tale and, in part, a familiar one to most
merchant sailors. We were seeking new markets for our goods and had equipped a good-sized fleet,
which I commanded as the largest shareholder." He seated himself casually upon the big corpse of the
Chalalite and began to count the money. "Would you hear the tale or do I bore you already?"
 "I'd be glad to listen."
 Reaching behind him, Smiorgan pulled a wine-flask from the belt of the corpse and offered it to
Elric, who accepted it and drank sparingly of a wine which was unusually good.
 Smiorgan took the flask when Elric had finished. "That's part of our cargo," he said. "We were
proud of it. A good vintage, eh?"
 "Excellent. So you set off from the Purple Towns?"
 "Aye. Going east toward the Unknown Kingdoms. We sailed due east for a couple of weeks,
sighting some of the bleakest coasts I have ever seen, and then we saw no land at all for another week.
That was when we entered a stretch of water we came to call the Roaring Rocks-like the Serpent's Teeth
off Shazar's coast, but much greater in expanse, and larger, too. Huge volcanic cliffs which rose from the
sea on every side and around which the waters heaved and boiled and howled with a fierceness I've
rarely experienced. Well, in short, the fleet was dispersed and at least four ships were lost on those rocks.
At last we were able to escape those waters and found ourselves becalmed and alone. We searched for
our sister ships for a while and then decided to give ourselves another week before turning for home, for
we had no liking to go back into the Roaring Rocks again. Low on provisions, we sighted land at lastgrassy
cliffs and hospitable beaches and, inland, some signs of cultivation, so we knew we had found
civilization again. We put into a small fishing port and satisfied the natives-who spoke no tongue used in
the Young Kingdoms-that we were friendly. And that was when the woman approached us."
 "The Melnibonan woman?"
 "If Melnibonan she was. She was a fine-looking woman, I'll say that. We were short of provisions,
as I told you, and short of any means of purchasing them, for the fishermen desired little of what we had
to trade. Having given up our original quest, we were content to head westward again."
 "The woman?"
 "She wished to buy passage to the Young Kingdoms- and was content to go with us as far as Menii,
our home port. For her passage she gave us two of those wheels. One was used to buy provisions in the
town-Graghin, I think it was called-and after making repairs we set off again."
 "You never reached the Purple Towns?"
 "There were more storms-strange storms. Our instruments were useless, our lodestones were of no
help to us at all. We became even more completely lost than before. Some of my men argued that we had
gone beyond our own world altogether. Some blamed the woman, saying she was a sorceress who had
no intention of going to Menii. But I believed her. Night fell and seemed to last forever until we sailed
into a calm dawn beneath a blue sun. My men were close to panic-and it takes much to make my men
panic-when we sighted the island. As we headed for it those pirates attacked us in a ship which belonged
to history-it should have been on the bottom of the ocean, not on the surface. I've seen pictures of such
craft in murals on a temple wall in Tarkesh. In ramming us, she stove in half her port side and was
sinking even when they swarmed aboard. They were desperate, savage men, Elric-half-starved and bloodhungry.
We were weary after our voyage, but fought well. During the fighting the woman disappeared,
killed herself, maybe, when she saw the stamp of our conquerors. After a long fight only myself and one
other, who died soon after, were left. That was when I became cunning and decided to wait for revenge."
 "The woman had a name?"
 "None she would give. I have thought the matter over and suspect that, after all, we were used by
her. Perhaps she did not seek Menii and the Young Kingdoms. Perhaps it was this world she sought, and, 
by sorcery, led us here."
 "This world? You think it different from our own?"
 "If only because of the sun's strange color. Do you not think so, too? You, with your Melnibonan
knowledge of such things, must believe it."
 "I have dreamed of such things," Elric admitted, but he would say no more.
 "Most of the pirates thought as I-they were from all the ages of the Young Kingdoms. That much I
discovered. Some were from the earliest years of the era, some from our own time-and some were from
the future. Adventurers, most of them, who, at some stage in their lives, sought a legendary land of great
riches which lay on the other side of an ancient gateway, rising from the middle of the ocean; but they
found themselves trapped here, unable to sail back through this mysterious gate. Others had been
involved in sea-fights, thought themselves drowned and woken up on the shores of the island. Many, I
suppose, had once had reasonable virtues, but there is little to support life on the island and they had
become wolves, living off one another or any ship unfortunate enough to pass, inadvertently, through
this gate of theirs."
 Elric recalled part of his dream. "Did any call it the 'Crimson Gate'?"
 "Several did, aye."
 "And yet the theory is unlikely, if you'll forgive my skepticism," Elric said. "As one who has passed
through the Shade Gate to Ameeron ..."
 "You know of other worlds, then?"
 "I've never heard of this one. And I am versed in such matters. That is why I doubt the reasoning.
And yet, there was the dream...."
 "Dream?"
 "Oh, it was nothing. I am used to such dreams and give them no significance."
 "The theory cannot seem surprising to a Melnibonan, Elric!" Smiorgan grinned again. "It's I who
should be skeptical, not you."
 And Elric replied, half to himself: "Perhaps I fear the implications more." He lifted his head, and
with the shaft of a broken spear, began to poke at the fire. "Certain ancient sorcerers of Melnibon
proposed that an infinite number of worlds coexist with our own. Indeed, my dreams, of late, have hinted
as much!" He forced himself to smile. "But I cannot afford to believe such things. Thus, I reject them."
 "Wait for the dawn," said Smiorgan Baldhead. "The color of the sun shall prove the theory."
 "Perhaps it will prove only that we both dream," said Elric. The smell of death was strong in his
nostrils. He pushed aside those corpses nearest to the fire and settled himself to sleep.
 Smiorgan Baldhead had begun to sing a strong yet lilting song in his own dialect, which Elric could
scarcely follow.
 "Do you sing of your victory over your enemies?" the albino asked.
 Smiorgan paused for a moment, half-amused. "No, Sir Elric, I sing to keep the shades at bay. After
all, these fellows' ghosts must still be lurking nearby, in the dark, so little time has passed since they
died."
 "Fear not," Elric told him. "Their souls are already eaten."
 But Smiorgan sang on, and his voice was louder, his song more intense, than ever it had been
before.
 Just before he fell asleep, Elric thought he heard a horse whinny, and he meant to ask Smiorgan if
any of the pirates had been mounted, but he fell asleep before he could do so.


 III

 Recalling little of his voyage on the Dark Ship, Elric would never know how he came to reach the
world in which he now found himself. In later years he would recall most of these experiences as 
dreams, and indeed they seemed dreamlike even as they occurred.
 He slept uneasily, and in the morning the clouds were heavier, shining with that strange, leaden
light, though the sun itself was obscured. Smiorgan Baldhead of the Purple Towns was pointing upward,
already on his feet, speaking with quiet triumph:
 "Will that evidence suffice to convince you, Elric of Melnibon?"
 "I am convinced of a quality about the light-possibly about this terrain-which makes the sun appear
blue," Elric replied. He glanced with distaste around him at the carnage. The corpses made a wretched
sight and he was filled with a nebulous misery that was neither remorse nor pity.
 Smiorgan's sigh was sardonic. "Well, Sir Skeptic, we had best retrace my steps and seek my ship.
What say you?"
 "I agree," the albino told him.
 "How far had you marched from the coast when you found us?"
 Elric told him.
 Smiorgan smiled. "You arrived in the nick of time, then. I should have been most embarrassed by
today if the sea had been reached and I could show my pirate friends no village! I shall not forget this
favor you have done me, Elric. I am a count of the Purple Towns and have much influence. If there is
any service I can perform for you when we return, you must let me know."
 "I thank you," Elric said gravely. "But first we must discover a means of escape."
 Smiorgan had gathered up a satchel of food, some water and some wine. Elric had no stomach to
make his breakfast among the dead, so he slung the satchel over his shoulder. "I'm ready," he said.
 Smiorgan was satisfied. "Come-we go this way."
 Elric began to follow the sea-lord over the dry, crunching turf. The steep sides of the valley loomed
over them, tinged with a peculiar and unpleasant greenish hue, the result of the brown foliage being
stained by the blue light from above. When they reached the river, which was narrow and ran rapidly
through boulders giving easy means of crossing, they rested and ate. Both men were stiff from the
previous night's fighting; both were glad to wash the dried blood and mud from their bodies in the water.
 Refreshed, the pair climbed over the boulders and left the river behind, ascending the slopes,
speaking little so that their breath was saved for the exertion. It was noon by the time they reached the
top of the valley and observed a plain not unlike the one which Elric had first crossed. Elric now had a
fair idea of the island's geography: it resembled the top of a mountain, with an indentation near the center
which was the valley. Again he became sharply aware of the absence of any wildlife and remarked on
this to Count Smiorgan, who agreed that he had seen nothing-no bird, fish, nor beast since he had
arrived.
 "It's a barren little world, friend Elric, and a misfortune for a mariner to be wrecked upon its
shores."
 They moved on, until the sea could be observed meeting the horizon in the far distance.
 It was Elric who first heard the sound behind them, recognizing the steady thump of the hooves of a
galloping horse, but when he looked back over his shoulder he could see no sign of a rider, nor anywhere
that a rider could hide. He guessed that, in his tiredness, his ears were betraying him. It had been thunder
that he had heard.
 Smiorgan strode implacably onward, though he, too, must have heard the sound.
 Again it came. Again, Elric turned. Again he saw nothing.
 "Smiorgan? Did you hear a rider?"
 Smiorgan continued to walk without looking back. "I heard," he grunted.
 "You have heard it before?"
 "Many times since I arrived. The pirates heard it, too, and some believed it their nemesis-an Angel
of Death seeking them out for retribution."
 "You don't know the source?"
 Smiorgan paused, then stopped, and when he turned his face was grim. "Once or twice I have 
caught a glimpse of a horse, I think. A tall horse-white-richly dressed- but with no man upon his back.
Ignore it, Elric, as I do. We have larger mysteries with which to occupy our minds!"
 "You are afraid of it, Smiorgan?"
 He accepted this. "Aye. I confess it. But neither fear nor speculation will rid us of it. Come!"
 Elric was bound to see the sense of Smiorgan's statement and he accepted it; yet when the sound
came again, about an hour later, he could not resist turning. Then he thought he glimpsed the outline of a
large stallion, caparisoned for riding, but that might have been nothing more than an idea Smiorgan had
put in his mind.
 The day grew colder and in the air was a peculiar, bitter odor. Elric remarked on the smell to Count
Smiorgan and learned that this, too, was familiar.
 "The smell comes and goes, but it is usually here in some strength."
 "Like sulfur," said Elric.
 Count Smiorgan's laugh had much irony in it, as if Elric made reference to some private joke of
Smiorgan's own. "Oh, aye! Sulfur right enough!"
 The drumming of hooves grew louder behind them as they neared the coast and at last Elric, and
Smiorgan too, turned around again, to look.
 And now a horse could be seen plainly-riderless, but saddled and bridled, its dark eyes intelligent,
its beautiful white head held proudly.
 "Are you still convinced of the absence of sorcery here, Sir Elric?" Count Smiorgan asked with
some satisfaction. "The horse was invisible. Now it is visible." He shrugged the battle-ax on his shoulder
into a better position. "Either that, or it moves from one world to another with-ease, so that all we mainly
hear are its hoofbeats."
 "If so," said Elric sardonically, eyeing the stallion, "it might bear us back to our own world."
 "You admit, then, that we are marooned in some Limbo?"
 "Very well, yes. I admit the possibility."
 "Have you no sorcery to trap the horse?"
 "Sorcery does not come so easily to me, for I have no great liking for it," the albino told him.
 As they spoke, they approached the horse, but it would let them get no closer. It snorted and moved
backward, keeping the same distance between them and itself.
 At last, Elric said, "We waste time, Count Smiorgan. Let's get to your ship with speed and forget
blue suns and enchanted horses as quickly as we may. Once aboard the ship I can doubtless help you
with a little incantation or two, for we'll need aid of some sort if we're to sail a large ship by ourselves."
 They marched on, but the horse continued to follow them. They came to the edge of the cliffs,
standing high above a narrow, rocky bay in which a battered ship lay at anchor. The ship had the high,
fine lines of a Purple Towns merchantman, but its decks were piled with shreds of torn canvas, pieces of
broken rope, shards of timber, torn-open bales of cloth, smashed wine-jars, and all manner of other
refuse, while in several places her rails were smashed and two or three of her yards had splintered. It was
evident that she had been through both storms and sea-fights and it was a wonder that she still floated.
 "We'll have to tidy her up as best we can, using only the mains'l for motion," mused Smiorgan.
"Hopefully we can salvage enough food to last us..."
 "Look!" Elric pointed, sure that he had seen someone in the shadows near the afterdeck. "Did the
pirates leave any of their company behind?"
 "None."
 "Did you see anyone on the ship, just then?"
 "My eyes play filthy tricks on my mind," Smiorgan told him. "It is this damned blue light. There is
a rat or two aboard, that's all. And that's what you saw."
 "Possibly." Elric looked back. The horse appeared to be unaware of them as it cropped the brown
grass. "Well, let's finish the journey."
 They scrambled down the steeply sloping cliff-face and were soon on the shore, wading through the 
shallows for the ship, clambering up the slippery ropes which still hung over the sides, and, at last,
setting their feet with some relief upon the deck.
 "I feel more secure already," said Smiorgan. "This ship was my home for so long!" He searched
through the scattered cargo until he found an unbroken wine-jar, carved off the seal, and handed it to
Elric. Elric lifted the heavy jar and let a little of the good wine flow into his mouth. As Count Smiorgan
began to drink, Elric was sure he saw another movement near the afterdeck, and he moved closer.
 Now he was certain that he heard strained, rapid breathing-like the breathing of one who sought to
stifle his need for air rather than be detected. They were slight sounds, but the albino's ears, unlike his
eyes, were sharp. His hand ready to draw his sword, he stalked toward the source of the sound, Smiorgan
now behind him.
 She emerged from her hiding place before he reached her. Her hair hung in heavy, dirty coils about
her pale face; her shoulders were slumped and her soft arms hung limply at her sides, and her dress was
stained and ripped.
 As Elric approached, she fell on her knees before him. "Take my life," she said humbly, "but I beg
you-do not take me back to Saxif D'Aan, though I know you must be his servant or his kinsman."
 "It's she!" cried Smiorgan in astonishment. "It's our passenger. She must have been in hiding all this
tune."
 Elric stepped forward, lifting up the girl's chin so that he could study her face. There was a
Melnibonan cast about her features, but she was, to his mind, of the Young Kingdoms; she lacked the
pride of a Melnibonan woman, too. "What name was that you used, girl?" he asked kindly. "Did you
speak of Saxif D'Aan? Earl Saxif D'Aan of Melnibon?
 "I did, my lord."
 "Do not fear me as his servant," Elric told her. "And as for being a kinsman, I suppose you could
call me that, on my mother's side-or rather my great-grandmother's side. He was an ancestor. He must
have been dead for two centuries, at least!"
 "No," she said. "He lives, my lord."
 "On this island?"
 "This island is not his home, but it is in this plane that he exists. I sought to escape him through the
Crimson Gate. I fled through the gate in a skiff, reached the town where you found me, Count Smiorgan,
but he drew me back once I was aboard your ship. He drew me back and the ship with me. For that, I
have remorse-and for what befell your crew. Now I know he seeks me. I can feel his presence growing
nearer."
 "Is he invisible?" Smiorgan asked suddenly. "Does he ride a white horse?"
 She gasped. "You see! He is near! Why else should the horse appear on this island?"
 "He rides it?" Elric asked.
 "No, no! He fears the horse almost as much as I fear him. The horse pursues him!"
 Elric produced the Melnibonan gold wheel from his purse. "Did you take this from Earl Saxif
D'Aan?"
 "I did."
 The albino frowned.
 "Who is this man, Elric?" Count Smiorgan asked. "You describe him as an ancestor-yet he lives in
this world. What do you know of him?"
 Elric weighed the large gold wheel in his hand before replacing it in his pouch. "He was something
of a legend in Melnibon. His story is part of our literature. He was a great sorcerer-one of the greatestand
he fell in love. It's rare enough for Melnibonans to fall in love, as others understand the emotion,
but rarer for one to have such feelings for a girl who was not even of our own race. She was halfMelnibonan,
so I heard, but from a land which was, in those days, a Melnibonan possession, a western
province close to Dharijor. She was bought by him in a batch of slaves he planned to use for some 
sorcerous experiment, but he singled her out, saving her from whatever fate it was the others suffered.
He lavished his attention upon her, giving her everything. For her, he abandoned his practices, retired to
live quietly away from Imrryr, and I think she showed him a certain affection, though she did not seem
to love him. There was another, you see, called Carolak, as I recall, and also half-Melnibonan, who had
become a mercenary in Shazar and risen in the favor of the Shazarian court. She had been pledged to this
Carolak before her abduction. ..."
 "She loved him?" Count Smiorgan asked.
 "She was pledged to marry him, but let me finish my story. . . ." Elric continued: "Well, at length
Carolak, now a man of some substance, second only to the king in Shazar, heard of her fate and swore to
rescue her. He came with raiders to Melnibon's shores, and aided by sorcery, sought out Saxif D'Aan's
palace. That done, he sought the girl, finding her at last in the apartments Saxif D'Aan had set aside for
her use. He told her that he had come to claim her as his bride, to rescue her from persecution. Oddly, the
girl resisted, suggesting that she had been too long a slave in the Melnibonan harem to re-adapt to the
life of a princess in the Shazarian court. Carolak scoffed at this and seized her. He managed to escape the
castle and had the girl over the saddle of his horse and was about to rejoin his men on the coast when
Saxif D'Aan detected them. Carolak, I think, was slain, or else a spell was put on him, but Saxif D'Aan,
in his terrible jealousy and certain that the girl had planned the escape with a lover, ordered her to die
upon the Wheel of Chaos-a machine rather like that coin in design. Her limbs were broken slowly and
Saxif D'Aan sat and watched, through long days, while she died. Her skin was peeled from her flesh, and
Earl Saxif D'Aan observed every detail of her punishment. Soon it was evident that the drugs and sorcery
used to sustain her life were failing and Saxif D'Aan ordered her taken from the Wheel of Chaos and laid
upon a couch. 'Well,' he said, 'you have been punished for betraying me and I am glad. Now you may
die.' And he saw that her lips, blood-caked and frightful, were moving, and he bent to hear her words."
 "Those words? Revenge? An oath?" asked Smiorgan.
 "Her last gesture was an attempt to embrace him. And the words were those she had never uttered to
him before, much as he had hoped that she would. She said simply, over and over again, until the last
breath left her: 'I love you. I love you. I love you.' And then she died."
 Smiorgan rubbed at his beard. "Gods! What then? What did your ancestor do?"
 "He knew remorse."
 "Of course!"
 "Not so, for a Melnibonan. Remorse is a rare emotion with us. Few have ever experienced it. Torn
by guilt, Earl Saxif D'Aan left Melnibon, never to return. It was assumed that he had died in some
remote land, trying to make amends for what he had done to the only creature he had ever loved. But
now, it seems, he sought the Crimson Gate, perhaps thinking it an opening into Hell."
 "But why should he plague me!" the girl cried. "I am not she! My name is Vassliss. I am a
merchant's daughter, from Jharkor. I was voyaging to visit my uncle in Vilmir when our ship was
wrecked. A few of us escaped in an open boat. More storms seized us. I was flung from the boat and was
drowning when"-she shuddered- "when his galley found me. I was grateful, then ..."
 "What happened?" Elric pushed the matted hair away from her face and offered her some of their
wine. She drank gratefully.
 "He took me to his palace and told me that he would marry me, that I should be his empress forever
and rule beside him. But I was frightened. There was such pain in him-and such cruelty, too. I thought he
must devour me, destroy me. Soon after my capture, I took the money and the boat and fled for the
gateway, which he had told me about...."
 "You could find this gateway for us?" Elric asked.
 "I think so. I have some knowledge of seamanship, learned from my father. But what would be the
use, sir? He would find us again and drag us back. And he must be very near, even now."
 "I have a little sorcery myself," Elric assured her, "and will pit it against Saxif D'Aan's, if I must."
He turned to Count Smiorgan. "Can we get a sail aloft quickly?"
 "Fairly quickly."
 "Then let's hurry, Count Smiorgan Baldhead. I might have the means of getting us through this
Crimson Gate and free from any further involvement in the dealings of the dead!"


 IV

 While Count Smiorgan and Vassliss of Jharkor watched, Elric lowered himself to the deck, panting
and pale. His first attempt to work sorcery in this world had failed and had exhausted him.
 "I am further convinced," he told Smiorgan, "that we are in another plane of existence, for I should
have worked my incantations with less effort."
 "You have failed."
 Elric rose with some difficulty. "I shall try again."
 He turned his white face skyward; he closed his eyes; he stretched out his arms and his body tensed
as he began the incantation again, his voice growing louder and louder, higher and higher, so that it
resembled the shrieking of a gale.
 He forgot where he was; he forgot his own identity; he forgot those who were with him as his whole
mind concentrated upon the summoning. He sent his call out beyond the confines of the world, into that
strange plane where the elementals dwelled-where the powerful creatures of the air could still be foundthe
sylphs of the breeze, and the sharnahs, who lived in the storms, and the most powerful of all, the
h'Haarshanns, creatures of the whirlwind.
 And now at last some of them began to come at his summons, ready to serve him as, by virtue of an
ancient pact, the elementals had served his forefathers. And slowly the sail of the ship began to fill, and
the timbers creaked, and Smiorgan raised the anchor, and the ship was sailing away from the island,
through the rocky gap of the harbor, and out into the open sea, still beneath a strange blue sun.
 Soon a huge wave was forming around them, lifting up the ship and carrying it across the ocean, so
that Count Smiorgan and the girl marveled at the speed of their progress, while Elric, his crimson eyes
open now, but blank and unseeing, continued to croon to his unseen allies.
 Thus the ship progressed across the waters of the sea, and at last the island was out of sight and the
girl, checking their position against the position of the sun, was able to give Count Smiorgan sufficient
information for him to steer a course.
 As soon as he could, Count Smiorgan went up to Elric, who still straddled the deck, still as stifflimbed
as before, and shook him.
 "Elric! You will kill yourself with this effort. We need your friends no longer!"
 At once the wind dropped and the wave dispersed and Elric, gasping, fell to the deck.
 "It is harder here," he said. "It is so much harder here. It is as if I have to call across far greater gulfs
than any I have known before."
 And then Elric slept.
 He lay in a warm bunk in a cool cabin. Through the porthole filtered diffused blue light. He sniffed.
He caught the odor of hot food, and turning his head, saw that Vassliss stood there, a bowl of broth in her
hands. "I was able to cook this," she said. "It will improve your health. As far as I can tell, we are
nearing the Crimson Gate. The seas are always rough around the gate, so you will need your strength."
 Elric thanked her pleasantly and began to eat the broth as she watched him.
 "You are very like Saxif D'Aan," she said. "Yet harder in a way-and gentler, too. He is so remote. I
know why that girl could never tell him that she loved him."
 Elric smiled. "Oh, it's nothing more than a folktale, probably, the story I told you. This Saxif D'Aan
could be another person altogether-or an impostor, even, who has taken his name-or a sorcerer. Some
sorcerers take the names of other sorcerers, for they think it gives them more power."
 There came a cry from above, but Elric could not make out the words.
 The girl's expression became alarmed. Without a word to Elric, she hurried from the cabin.
 Elric, rising unsteadily, followed her up the companion-way.
 Count Smiorgan Baldhead was at the wheel of his ship and he was pointing toward the horizon
behind them. "What do you make of that, Elric?"
 Elric peered at the horizon, but could see nothing. Often his eyes were weak, as now. But the girl
said in a voice of quiet despair:
 "It is a golden sail."
 "You recognize it?" Elric asked her.
 "Oh, indeed I do. It is the galleon of Earl Saxif D'Aan. He has found us. Perhaps he was lying in
wait along our route, knowing we must come this way."
 "How far are we from the gate?"
 "I am not sure."
 At that moment, there came a terrible noise from below, as if something sought to stave in the
timbers of the ship.
 "It's in the forward hatches!" cried Smiorgan. "See what it is, friend Elric! But take care, man!"
 Cautiously Elric prised back one of the hatch covers and peered into the murky fastness of the hold.
The noise of stamping and thumping continued on, and as his eyes adjusted to the light, he saw the
source.
 The white horse was there. It whinnied as it saw him, almost in greeting.
 "How did it come aboard?" Elric asked. "I saw nothing. I heard nothing."
 The girl was almost as white as Elric. She sank to her knees beside the hatch, burying her face in
her arms.
 "He has us! He has us!"
 "There is still a chance we can reach the Crimson Gate in time," Elric reassured her. "And once in
my own world, why, I can work much stronger sorcery to protect us."
 "No," she sobbed, "it is too late. Why else would the white horse be here? He knows that Saxif
D'Aan must soon board us."
 "He'll have to fight us before he shall have you," Elric promised her.
 "You have hot seen his men. Cutthroats all. Desperate and wolfish! They'll show you no mercy.
You would be best advised to hand me over to Saxif D'Aan at once and save yourselves. You'll gain
nothing from trying to protect me. But I'd ask you a favor."
 "What's that?"
 "Find me a small knife to carry, that I may kill myself as soon as I know you two are safe."
 Elric laughed, dragging her to her feet. "I'll have no such melodramatics from you, lass! We stand
together. Perhaps we can bargain with Saxif D'Aan."
 "What have you to barter?"
 "Very little. But he is not aware of that."
 "He can read your thoughts, seemingly. He has great powers!"
 "I am Elric of Melnibon. I am said to possess a certain facility in the sorcerous arts, myself."
 "But you are not as single-minded as Saxif D'Aan," she said simply. "Only one thing obsesses himthe
need to make me his consort."
 "Many girls would be flattered by the attention-glad to be an empress with a Melnibonan emperor
for a husband." Elric was sardonic.
 She ignored his tone. "That is why I fear him so," she said in a murmur. "If I lost my determination
for a moment, I could love him. I should be destroyed! It is what she must have known!"


 V
 
 The gleaming galleon, sails and sides all gilded so that it seemed the sun itself pursued them, moved
rapidly upon them while the girl and Count Smiorgan watched aghast and Elric desperately attempted to
recall his elemental allies, without success.
 Through the pale blue light the golden ship sailed relentlessly in their wake. Its proportions were
monstrous, its sense of power vast, its gigantic prow sending up huge, foamy waves on both sides as it
sped silently toward them.
 With the look of a man preparing himself to meet death, Count Smiorgan Baldhead of the Purple
Towns unslung his battle-ax and loosened his sword in its scabbard, setting his little metal cap upon his
bald pate. The girl made no sound, no movement at all, but she wept.
 Elric shook his head and his long, milk-white hair formed a halo around his face for a moment. His
moody crimson eyes began to focus on the world around him. He recognized the ship; it was of a pattern
with the golden battle-barges of Melnibon-doubtless the ship in which Earl Saxif D'Aan had fled his
homeland, searching for the Crimson Gate. Now Elric was convinced that this must be that same Saxif
D'Aan and he knew less fear than did his companions, but considerably greater curiosity. Indeed, it was
almost with nostalgia that he noted the ball of fire, like a natural comet, glowing with green light, come
hissing and spluttering toward them, flung by the ship's forward catapult. He half expected to see a great
dragon wheeling in the sky overhead, for it was with dragons and gilded battle-craft like these that
Melnibon had once conquered the world.
 The fireball fell into the sea a few inches from their bow and was evidently placed there
deliberately, as a warning.
 "Don't stop!" cried Vassliss. "Let the flames slay us! It will be better!"
 Smiorgan was looking upward. "We have no choice. Look! He has banished the wind, it seems."
 They were becalmed. Elric smiled a grim smile. He knew now what the folk of the Young
Kingdoms must have felt when his ancestors had used these identical tactics against them.
 "Elric?" Smiorgan turned to the albino. "Are these your people? That ship's Melnibonan without
question!"
 "So are the methods," Elric told him. "I am of the blood royal of Melnibon. I could be emperor,
even now, if I chose to claim my throne. There is some small chance that Earl Saxif D'Aan, though an
ancestor, will recognize me and, therefore, recognize my authority. We are a conservative people, the
folk of the Dragon Isle."
 The girl spoke through dry lips, hopelessly: "He recognizes only the authority of the Lords of
Chaos, who give him aid."
 "All Melnibonans recognize that authority," Elric told her with a certain humor.
 From the forward hatch, the sound of the stallion's stamping and snorting increased.
 "We're besieged by enchantments!" Count Smiorgan's normally ruddy features had paled. "Have
you none of your own, Prince Elric, you can use to counter them?"
 "None, it seems."
 The golden ship loomed over them. Elric saw that the rails, high overhead, were crowded not with
Imrryrian warriors but with cutthroats equally as desperate as those he had fought upon the island, and,
apparently, drawn from the same variety of historical periods and nations. The galleon's long sweeps
scraped the sides of the smaller vessel as they folded, like the legs of some water insect, to enable the
grappling irons to be flung out. Iron claws bit into the timbers of the little ship and the brigandly crowd
overhead cheered, grinning at them, menacing them with their weapons.
 The girl began to run to the seaward side of the ship, but Elric caught her by the arm.
 "Do not stop me, I beg you!" she cried. "Rather, jump with me and drown!"
 "You think that death will save you from Saxif D'Aan?" Elric said. "If he has the power you say,
death will only bring you more firmly into his grasp!"
 "Oh!" The girl shuddered and then, as a voice called down to them from one of the tall decks of the
gilded ship, she gave a moan and fainted into Elric's arms, so that, weakened as he was by his spell-
working, it was all that he could do to stop himself falling with her to the deck.
 The voice rose over the coarse shouts and guffaws of the crew. It was pure, lilting, and sardonic. It
was the voice of a Melnibonan, though it spoke the common tongue of the Young Kingdoms, a
corruption, in itself, of the speech of the Bright Empire.
 "May I have the captain's permission to come aboard?"
 Count Smiorgan growled back: "You have us firm, sir! Don't try to disguise an act of piracy with a
polite speech!"
 "I take it I have your permission, then." The unseen speaker's tone remained exactly the same.
 Elric watched as part of the rail was drawn back to allow a gangplank, studded with golden nails to
give firmer footing, to be lowered from the galleon's deck to theirs.
 A tall figure appeared at the top of the gangplank. He had the fine features of a Melnibonan
nobleman, was thin, proud in his bearing, clad in voluminous robes of cloth-of-gold, an elaborate helmet
in gold and ebony upon his long auburn locks. He had gray-blue eyes, pale, slightly flushed skin, and he
carried, so far as Elric could see, no weapons of any kind.
 With considerable dignity, Earl Saxif D'Aan began to descend, his rascals at his back. The contrast
between this beautiful intellectual and those he commanded was remarkable. Where he walked with
straight back, elegant and noble, they slouched, filthy, degenerate, unintelligent, grinning with pleasure
at their easy victory. Not a man among them showed any sign of human dignity; each was overdressed in
tattered and unclean finery, each had at least three weapons upon his person, and there was much
evidence of looted jewelry, of nose-rings, earrings, bangles, necklaces, toe- and finger-rings, pendants,
cloak-pins, and the like.
 "Gods!" murmured Smiorgan. "I've rarely seen such a collection of scum, and I thought I'd
encountered most kinds in my voyages. How can such a man bear to be in their company?"
 "Perhaps it suits his sense of irony," Elric suggested.
 Earl Saxif D'Aan reached their deck and stood looking up at them to where they still positioned
themselves, in the poop. He gave a slight bow. His features were controlled and only his eyes suggested
something of the intensity of emotion dwelling within bun, particularly as they fell upon the girl in
Elric's arms.
 "I am Earl Saxif D'Aan of Melnibon, now of the Islands Beyond the Crimson Gate. You have
something with you which is mine. I would claim it from you."
 "You mean the Lady Vassliss of Jharkor?" Elric said, his voice as steady as Saxif D'Aan's.
 Saxif D'Aan seemed to note Elric for the first time. A slight frown crossed his brow and was
quickly dismissed. "She is mine," he said. "You may be assured that she will come to no harm at my
hands."
 Elric, seeking some advantage, knew that he risked much when he next spoke, in the High Tongue
of Melnibon, used between those of the blood royal. "Knowledge of your history does not reassure me,
Saxif D'Aan."
 Almost imperceptibly, the golden man stiffened and fire flared in his gray-blue eyes. "Who are you,
to speak the Tongue of Kings? Who are you, who claims knowledge of my past?"
 "I am Elric, son of Sadric, and I am the four-hundred-and-twenty-eighth emperor of the folk of R'lin
K'ren A'a, who landed upon the Dragon Isle ten thousand years ago. I am Elric, your emperor, Earl Saxif
D'Aan, and I demand your fealty." And Elric held up his right hand, upon which still gleamed a ring set
with a single Actorios stone, the Ring of Kings.
 Earl Saxif D'Aan now had firm control of himself again. He gave no sign that he was impressed.
"Your sovereignty does not extend beyond your own world, noble emperor, though I greet you as a
fellow monarch." He spread his arms so that his long sleeves rustled. "This world is mine. All that exists
beneath the blue sun do I rule. You trespass, therefore, in my domain. I have every right to do as I
please."
 "Pirate pomp," muttered Count Smiorgan, who had understood nothing of the conversation but had 
gathered something of what passed by the tone. "Pirate braggadocio. What does he say, Elric?"
 "He convinces me that he is not, in your sense, a pirate, Count Smiorgan. He claims that he is ruler
of this plane. Since there is apparently no other, we must accept his claim."
 "Gods! Then let him behave like a monarch and let us sail safely out of his waters!"
 "We may-if we give him the girl."
 Count Smiorgan shook his head. "I'll not do that. She's my passenger, in my charge. I must die
rather than do that. It is the Code of the Sea-lords of the Purple Towns."
 "You are famous for your adherence to that code," Elric said. "As for myself, I have taken this girl
into my protection and, as hereditary emperor of Melnibon, I cannot allow myself to be browbeaten."
 They had conversed in a murmur, but, somehow, Earl Saxif D'Aan had heard them.
 "I must let you know," he said evenly, in the common tongue, "that the girl is mine. You steal her
from me. Is that the action of an emperor?"
 "She is not a slave," Elric said, "but the daughter of a free merchant in Jharkor. You have no rights
upon her."
 Earl Saxif D'Aan said, "Then I cannot open the Crimson Gate for you. You must remain in my
world forever."
 "You have closed the gate? Is it possible?"
 "To me."
 "Do you know that the girl would rather die than be captured by you, Earl Saxif D'Aan? Does it
give you pleasure to instill such fear?"
 The golden man looked directly into Elric's eyes as if he made some cryptic challenge. "The gift of
pain has ever been a favorite gift among our folk, has it not? Yet it is another gift I offer her. She calls
herself Vassliss of Jharkor, but she does not know herself. I know her. She is Gratyesha, Princess of
Fwem-Omeyo, and I would make her my bride."
 "How can it be that she does not know her own name?"
 "She is reincarnated-soul and flesh are identical-that is how I know. And I have waited, Emperor of
Melnibon, for many scores of years for her. Now I shall not be cheated of her."
 "As you cheated yourself, two centuries past, in Melnibon?"
 "You risk much with your directness of language, brother monarch!" There was a hint of a warning
in Saxif D'Aan's tone, a warning much fiercer than any implied by the words.
 "Well"-Elric shrugged-"you have more power than we do. My sorcery works poorly in your world.
Your ruffians outnumber us. It should not be difficult for you to take her from us."
 "You must give her to me. Then you may go free, back to your own world and your own time."
 Elric smiled. "There is sorcery here. She is no reincarnation. You'd bring your lost love's spirit from
the netherworld to inhabit this girl's body. Am I not right? That is why she must be given freely, or your
sorcery will rebound upon you-or might-and you would not take the risk."
 Earl Saxif D'Aan turned his head away so that Elric might not see his eyes. "She is the girl," he said,
in the High Tongue. "I know that she is. I mean her soul no harm. I would merely give it back its
memory."
 "Then it is stalemate," said Elric.
 "Have you no loyalty to a brother of the royal blood?" Saxif D'Aan murmured, still refusing to look
at Elric.
 "You claimed no such loyalty, as I recall, Earl Saxif D'Aan. If you accept me as your emperor, then
you must accept my decisions. I keep the girl in my custody. Or you must take her by force."
 "I am too proud."
 "Such pride shall ever destroy love," said Elric, almost in sympathy. "What now, King of Limbo?
What shall you do with us?"
 Earl Saxif D'Aan lifted his noble head, about to reply, when from the hold the stamping and the 
snorting began again. His eyes widened. He looked questioningly at Elric, and there was something close
to terror in his face.
 "What's that? What have you in the hold?"
 "A mount, my lord, that is all," said Elric equably.
 "A horse? An ordinary horse?"
 "A white one. A stallion, with bridle and saddle. It has no rider."
 At once Saxif D'Aan's voice rose as he shouted orders for his men. "Take those three aboard our
ship. This one shall be sunk directly. Hurry! Hurry!"
 Elric and Smiorgan shook off the hands which sought to seize them and they moved toward the
gangplank, carrying the girl between them, while Smiorgan muttered, "At least we are not slain, Elric.
But what becomes of us now?"
 Elric shook his head. "We must hope that we can continue to use Earl Saxif D'Aan's pride against
him, to our advantage, though the gods alone know how we shall resolve the dilemma."
 Earl Saxif D'Aan was already hurrying up the gangplank ahead of them.
 "Quickly," he shouted. "Raise the plank!"
 They stood upon the decks of the golden battle-barge and watched as the gangplank was drawn up,
the length of rail replaced.
 "Bring up the catapults," Saxif D'Aan commanded. "Use lead. Sink that vessel at once!"
 The noise from the forward hold increased. The horse's voice echoed over ships and water. Hooves
smashed at timber and then, suddenly, it came crashing through the hatch-covers, scrambling for
purchase on the deck with its front hooves, and then standing there, pawing at the planks, its neck
arching, its nostrils dilating, and its eyes glaring, as if ready to do battle.
 Now Saxif D'Aan made no attempt to hide the terror on his face. His voice rose to a scream as he
threatened his rascals with every sort of horror if they did not obey him with utmost speed. The catapults
were dragged up and huge globes of lead were lobbed onto the decks of Smiorgan's ship, smashing
through the planks like arrows through parchment so that almost immediately the ship began to sink.
 "Cut the grappling hooks!" cried Saxif D'Aan, wrenching a blade from the hand of one of his men
and sawing at the nearest rope. "Cast loose-quickly!"
 Even as Smiorgan's ship groaned and roared like a drowning beast, the ropes were cut. The ship
keeled over at once, and the horse disappeared.
 "Turn about!" shouted Saxif D'Aan. "Back to Fhaligarn and swiftly, or your souls shall feed my
fiercest demons!"
 There came a peculiar, high-pitched neighing from the foaming water, as Smiorgan's ship, stern
uppermost, gasped and was swallowed. Elric caught a glimpse of the white stallion, swimming strongly.
 "Go below!" Saxif D'Aan ordered, indicating a hatchway. "The horse can smell the girl and thus is
doubly difficult to lose."
 "Why do you fear it?" Elric asked. "It is only a horse. It cannot harm you."
 Saxif D'Aan uttered a laugh of profound bitterness. "Can it not, brother monarch? Can it not?"
 As they carried the girl below, Elric was frowning, remembering a little more of the legend of Saxif
D'Aan, of the girl he had punished so cruelly, and of her lover, Prince Carolak. The last he heard of Saxif
D'Aan was the sorcerer crying:
 "More sail! More sail!"
 And then the hatch had closed behind them and they found themselves in an opulent Melnibonan
day-cabin, full of rich hangings, precious metal, decorations of exquisite beauty and, to Count Smiorgan,
disturbing decadence. But it was Elric, as he lowered the girl to a couch, who noticed the smell.
 "Augh! It's the smell of a tomb-of damp and mold. Yet nothing rots. It is passing peculiar, friend
Smiorgan, is it not?"
 "I scarcely noticed, Elric." Smiorgan's voice was hollow. "But I would agree with you on one thing.
We are entombed. I doubt we'll live to escape this world now."


 VI

 An hour had passed since they had been forced aboard. The door had been locked behind them, and
it seemed Saxif D'Aan was too preoccupied with escaping the white stallion to bother with them. Peering
through the lattice of a porthole, Elric could look back to where their ship had been sunk. They were
many leagues distant already; yet he still thought, from time to time, that he saw the head and shoulders
of the stallion above the waves.
 Vassliss had recovered and sat pale and shivering upon the couch.
 "What more do you know of that horse?" Elric asked her. "It would be helpful to me if you could
recall anything you have heard."
 She shook her head. "Saxif D'Aan spoke little of it, but I gather he fears the rider more than he does
the horse."
 "Ah!" Elric frowned. "I suspected it! Have you ever seen the rider?"
 "Never. I think that Saxif D'Aan has never seen him, either. I think he believes himself doomed if
that rider should ever sit upon the white stallion."
 Elric smiled to himself.
 "Why do you ask so much about the horse?" Smiorgan wished to know.
 Elric shook his head. "I have an instinct, that is all. Half a memory. But I'll say nothing and think as
little as I may, for there is no doubt Saxif D'Aan, as Vassliss suggests, has some power of reading the
mind."
 They heard a footfall above, descending to their door. A bolt was drawn and Saxif D'Aan, his
composure fully restored, stood in the opening, his hands in his golden sleeves.
 "You will forgive, I hope, the peremptory way in which I sent you here. There was danger which
had to be averted at all costs. As a result, my manners were not all that they should have been."
 "Danger to us?" Elric asked. "Or to you, Earl Saxif D'Aan?"
 "In the circumstances, to all of us, I assure you."
 "Who rides the horse?" Smiorgan asked bluntly. "And why do you fear him?"
 Earl Saxif D'Aan was master of himself again, so there was no sign of a reaction. "That is very
much my private concern," he said softly. "Will you dine with me now?"
 The girl made a noise in her throat and Earl Saxif D'Aan turned piercing eyes upon her. "Gratyesha,
you will want to cleanse yourself and make yourself beautiful again. I will see that facilities are placed at
your disposal."
 "I am not Gratyesha," she said. "I am Vassliss, the merchant's daughter."
 "You will remember," he said. "In time, you will remember." There was such certainty, such
obsessive power, in his voice that even Elric experienced a frisson of awe. "The things will be brought to
you, and you may use this cabin as your own until we return to my palace on Fhaligarn. My lords . . ."
He indicated that they should leave.
 Elric said, "I'll not leave her, Saxif D'Aan. She is too afraid."
 "She fears only the truth, brother."
 "She fears you and your madness."
 Saxif D'Aan shrugged insouciantly. "I shall leave first, then. If you would accompany me, my lords
. . ." He strode from the cabin and they followed.
 Elric said, over his shoulder, "Vassliss, you may depend upon my protection." And he closed the
cabin doors behind him.
 Earl Saxif D'Aan was standing upon the deck, exposing his noble face to the spray which was flung
up by the ship as it moved with supernatural speed through the sea.
 "You called me mad, Prince Elric? Yet you must be versed in sorcery, yourself."
 "Of course. I am of the blood royal. I am reckoned knowledgeable in my own world."
 "But here? How well does your sorcery work?"
 "Poorly, I'll admit. The spaces between the planes seem greater."
 "Exactly. But I have bridged them. I have time to learn how to bridge them."
 "You are saying that you are more powerful than am I?"
 "It is a fact, is it not?"
 "It is. But I did not think we were about to indulge in sorcerous battles, Earl Saxif D'Aan."
 "Of course. Yet, if you were to think of besting me by sorcery, you would think twice, eh?"
 "I should be foolish to contemplate such a thing at all. It could cost me my soul. My life, at least."
 "True. You are a realist, I see."
 "I suppose so."
 "Then we can progress on simpler lines, to settle the dispute between us."
 "You propose a duel?" Elric was surprised.
 Earl Saxif D'Aan's laughter was light. "Of course not- against your sword? That has power in all
worlds, though the magnitude varies."
 "I'm glad that you are aware of that," Elric said significantly.
 "Besides," added Earl Saxif D'Aan, his golden robes rustling as he moved a little nearer to the rail,
"you would not kill me-for only I have the means of your escaping this world."
 "Perhaps we'd elect to remain," said Elric.
 "Then you would be my subjects. But, no-you would not like it here. I am self-exiled. I could not
return to my own world now, even if I wished to do so. It has cost me much, my knowledge. But I would
found a dynasty here, beneath the blue sun. I must have my wife, Prince Elric. I must have Gratyesha."
 "Her name is Vassliss," said Elric obstinately.
 "She thinks it is."
 "Then it is. I have sworn to protect her, as has Count Smiorgan. Protect her we shall. You will have
to kill us all."
 "Exactly," said Earl Saxif D'Aan with the air of a man who has been coaching a poor student toward
the correct answer to a problem, "Exactly. I shall have to kill you all. You leave me with little
alternative, Prince Elric."
 "Would that benefit you?"
 "It would. It would put a certain powerful demon at my service for a few hours."
 "We should resist."
 "I have many men. I do not value them. Eventually, they would overwhelm you. Would they not?"
 Elric remained silent.
 "My men would be aided by sorcery," added Saxif D'Aan. "Some would die, but not too many, I
think."
 Elric was looking beyond Saxif D'Aan, staring out to sea. He was sure that the horse still followed.
He was sure that Saxif D'Aan knew, also.
 "And if we gave up the girl?"
 "I should open the Crimson Gate for you. You would be honored guests. I should see that you were
borne safely through, even taken safely to some hospitable land in your own world, for even if you
passed through the gate there would be danger. The storms."
 Elric appeared to deliberate.
 "You have only a little time to make your decision, Prince Elric. I had hoped to reach my palace,
Fhaligarn, by now. I shall not allow you very much longer. Come, make your decision. You know I
speak the truth."
 "You know that I can work some sorcery in your world, do you not?"
 "You summoned a few friendly elementals to your aid, I know. But at what cost? Would you
challenge me directly?"
 "It would be unwise of me," said Elric.
 Smiorgan was tugging at his sleeve. "Stop this useless talk. He knows that we have given our word
to the girl and that we must fight him!"
 Earl Saxif D'Aan sighed. There seemed to be genuine sorrow in his voice. "If you are determined to
lose your lives..." he began.
 "I should like to know why you set such importance upon the speed with which we make up our
minds," Elric said. "Why cannot we wait until we reach Fhaligarn?"
 Earl Saxif D'Aan's expression was calculating, and again he looked full into Elric's crimson eyes. "I
think you know," he said, almost inaudibly.
 But Elric shook his head. "I think you give me too much credit for intelligence."
 "Perhaps."
 Elric knew that Saxif D'Aan was attempting to read his thoughts; he deliberately blanked his mind,
and suspected that he sensed frustration in the sorcerer's demeanor.
 And then the albino had sprung at his kinsman, his hand chopping at Saxif D'Aan's throat. The earl
was taken completely off guard. He tried to call out, but his vocal chords were numbed. Another blow,
and he fell to the deck, senseless.
 "Quickly, Smiorgan," Elric shouted, and he had leaped into the rigging, climbing swiftly upward to
the top yards. Smiorgan, bewildered, followed, and Elric had drawn his sword, even as he reached the
crow's nest, driving upward through the rail so that the lookout was taken in the groin scarcely before he
realized it.
 Next, Elric was hacking at the ropes holding the mainsail to the yard. Already a number of Saxif
D'Aan's ruffians were climbing after them.
 The heavy golden sail came loose, falling to envelop the pirates and take several of them down with
it.
 Elric climbed into the crow's nest and pitched the dead man over the rail in the wake of his
comrades. Then he had raised his sword over his head, holding it in his two hands, his eyes blank again,
his head raised to the blue sun, and Smiorgan, clinging to the mast below, shuddered as he heard a
peculiar crooning come from the albino's throat.
 More of the cutthroats were ascending, and Smiorgan hacked at the rigging, having the satisfaction
of seeing half a score go flying down to break their bones on the deck below, or be swallowed by the
waves.
 Earl Saxif D'Aan was beginning to recover, but he was still stunned.
 "Fool!" he was crying. "Fool!" But it was not possible to tell if he referred to Elric or to himself.
 Elric's voice became a wail, rhythmical and chilling, as he chanted his incantation, and the strength
from the man he had killed flowed into him and sustained him. His crimson eyes seemed to flicker with
fires of another, nameless color, and his whole body shook as the strange runes shaped themselves in a
throat which had never been made to speak such sounds.
 His voice became a vibrant groan as the incantation continued, and Smiorgan, watching as more of
the crew made efforts to climb the mainmast, felt an unearthly coldness creep through him.
 Earl Saxif D'Aan screamed from below:
 "You would not dare!"
 The sorcerer began to make passes in the air, his own incantation tumbling from his lips, and
Smiorgan gasped as a creature made of smoke took shape only a few feet below him. The creature
smacked its lips and grinned and stretched a paw, which became flesh even as it moved, toward
Smiorgan. He hacked at the paw with his sword, whimpering.
 "Elric!" cried Count Smiorgan, clambering higher so that he grasped the rail of the crow's nest.
"Elric! He sends demons against us now!"
 But Elric ignored him. His whole mind was in another world, a darker, bleaker world even than this
one. Through gray mists, he saw a figure, and he cried a name. "Come!" he called in the ancient tongue 
of his ancestors. "Come!"
 Count Smiorgan cursed as the demon became increasingly substantial. Red fangs clashed and green
eyes glared at him. A claw stroked his boot and no matter how much he struck with his sword, the
demon did not appear to notice the blows.
 There was no room for Smiorgan in the crow's nest, but he stood on the outer rim, shouting with
terror, desperate for aid. Still Elric continued to chant.
 "Elric! I am doomed!"
 The demon's paw grasped Smiorgan by his ankle.
 "Elric!"
 Thunder rolled out at sea; a bolt of lightning appeared for a second and then was gone. From
nowhere there came the sound of a horse's hooves pounding, and a human voice shouting in triumph.
 Elric sank back against the rail, opening his eyes in time to see Smiorgan being dragged slowly
downward. With the last of his strength he flung himself forward, leaning far out to stab downward with
Stormbringer. The runesword sank cleanly into the demon's right eye and it roared, letting go of
Smiorgan, striking at the blade which drew its energy from it, and as that energy passed into the blade
and thence to Elric, the albino grinned a frightful grin so that, for a second, Smiorgan became more
frightened of his friend than he had been of the demon. The demon began to dematerialize, its only
means of escape from the sword which drank its life-force, but more of Saxif D'Aan's rogues were
behind it, and their blades rattled as they sought the pair.
 Elric swung himself back over the rail, balanced precariously on the yard as he slashed at their
attackers, yelling the old battle-cries of his people. Smiorgan could do little but watch. He noted that
Saxif D'Aan was no longer on deck and he shouted urgently to Elric:
 "Elric! Saxif D'Aan. He seeks out the girl."
 Elric now took the attack to the pirates, and they were more than anxious to avoid the moaning
runesword, some even leaping into the sea rather than encounter it. Swiftly the two leaped from yard to
yard until they were again upon the deck.
 "What does he fear? Why does he not use more sorcery?" panted Count Smiorgan, as they ran
toward the cabin.
 "I have summoned the one who rides the horse," Elric told him. "I had so little time-and I could tell
you nothing of it, knowing that Saxif D'Aan would read my intention in your mind, if he could not in
mine!"
 The cabin doors were firmly secured from the inside. Elric began to hack at them with the black
sword.
 But the door resisted as it should not have resisted. "Sealed by sorcery and I've no means of
unsealing it," said the albino.
 "Will he kill her?"
 "I don't know. He might try to take her into some other plane. We must-"
 Hooves clattered on the deck and the white stallion reared behind them, only now it had a rider, clad
in bright purple and yellow armor. He was bareheaded and youthful, though there were several old scars
upon his face. His hair was thick and curly and blond and his eyes were a deep blue.
 He drew tightly upon his reins, steadying the horse. He looked piercingly at Elric. "Was it you,
Melnibonan, who opened the pathway for me?"
 "It was."
 "Then I thank you, though I cannot repay you."
 "You have repaid me," Elric told him, then drew Smiorgan aside as the rider leaned forward and
spurred his horse directly at the closed doors, smashing through as though they were rotted cotton.
 There came a terrible cry from within and then Earl Saxif D'Aan, hampered by his complicated
robes of gold, rushed from the cabin, seizing a sword from the hand of the nearest corpse, darting Elric a 
look not so much of hatred but of bewildered agony, as he turned to face the blond rider.
 The rider had dismounted now and came from the cabin, one arm around the shivering girl,
Vassliss, one hand upon the reins of his horse, and he said, sorrowfully:
 "You did me a great wrong, Earl Saxif D'Aan, but you did Gratyesha an infinitely more terrible one.
Now you must pay."
 Saxif D'Aan paused, drawing a deep breath, and when he looked up again, his eyes were steady, his
dignity had returned.
 "Must I pay in full?" he said.
 "In full."
 "It is all I deserve," said Saxif D'Aan. "I escaped my doom for many years, but I could not escape
the knowledge of my crime. She loved me, you know. Not you."
 "She loved us both, I think. But the love she gave you was her entire soul and I should not want that
from any woman."
 "You would be the loser, then."
 "You never knew how much she loved you."
 "Only-only afterward...."
 "I pity you, Earl Saxif D'Aan." The young man gave the reins of his horse to the girl, and he drew
his sword. "We are strange rivals, are we not?"
 "You have been all these years in Limbo, where I banished you-in that garden on Melnibon?"
 "All these years. Only my horse could follow you. The horse of Tendric, my father, also of
Melnibon, and also a sorcerer."
 "If I had known that, then, I'd have slain you cleanly and sent the horse to Limbo."
 "Jealousy weakened you, Earl Saxif D'Aan. But now we fight as we should have fought then-man to
man, with steel, for the hand of the one who loves us both. It is more than you deserve."
 "Much more," agreed the sorcerer. And he brought up his sword to lunge at the young man who,
Smiorgan guessed, could only be Prince Carolak himself.
 The fight was predetermined. Saxif D'Aan knew that, if Carolak did not. Saxif D'Aan's skill in arms
was up to the standard of any Melnibonan nobleman, but it could not match the skill of a professional
soldier, who had fought for his life time after time.
 Back and forth across the deck, while Saxif D'Aan's rascals looked on in openmouthed
astonishment, the rivals fought a duel which should have been fought and resolved two centuries before,
while the girl they both plainly thought was the reincarnation of Gratyesha watched them with as much
concern as might her original have watched when Saxif D'Aan first encountered Prince Carolak in the
gardens of his palace, so long ago.
 Saxif D'Aan fought well, and Carolak fought nobly, for on many occasions he avoided an obvious
advantage, but at length Saxif D'Aan threw away his sword, crying: "Enough. I'll give you your
vengeance, Prince Carolak. I'll let you take the girl. But you'll not give me your damned mercy-you'll not
take my pride."
 And Carolak nodded, stepped forward, and struck straight for Saxif D'Aan's heart.
 The blade entered clean and Earl Saxif D'Aan should have died, but he did not. He crawled along
the deck until he reached the base of the mast, and he rested his back against it, while the blood pumped
from the wounded heart. And he smiled.
 "It appears." he said faintly, "that I cannot die, so long have I sustained my life by sorcery. I am no
longer a man."
 He did not seem pleased by this thought, but Prince Carolak, stepping forward and leaning over
him, reassured him. "You will die," he promised, "soon."
 "What will you do with her-with Gratyesha?"
 "Her name is Vassliss," said Count Smiorgan insistently. "She is a merchant's daughter, from
Jharkor."
 "She must make up her own mind," Carolak said, ignoring Smiorgan.
 Earl Saxif D'Aan turned glazed eyes on Elric. "I must thank you," he said. "You brought me the one
who could bring me peace, though I feared him."
 "Is that why, I wonder, your sorcery was so weak against me?" Elric said. "Because you wished
Carolak to come and release you from your guilt?"
 "Possibly, Elric. You are wiser in some matters, it seems, than am I."
 "What of the Crimson Gate?" Smiorgan growled. "Can that be opened? Have you still the power,
Earl Saxif D'Aan?"
 "I think so." From the folds of his bloodstained garments of gold, the sorcerer produced a large
crystal which shone with the deep colors of a ruby. "This will not only lead you to the gate, it will enable
you to pass through, only I must warn you . . ." Saxif D'Aan began to cough. "The ship-" he gasped, "the
ship---like my body-has been sustained by means of sorcery-therefore . . ." His head slumped forward.
He raised it with a huge effort and stared beyond them at the girl who still held the reins of the white
stallion. "Farewell, Gratyesha, Princess of Fwem-Omeyo. I loved you." The eyes remained fixed upon
her, but they were dead eyes now.
 Carolak turned back to look at the girl. "How do you call yourself, Gratyesha?"
 "They call me Vassliss," she told him. She smiled up into his youthful, battle-scarred face. "That is
what they call me, Prince Carolak."
 "You know who I am?"
 "I know you now."
 "Will you come with me, Gratyesha? Will you be my bride, at last, in the strange new lands I have
found, beyond the world?"
 "I will come," she said.
 He helped her up into the saddle of his white stallion and climbed so that he sat behind her. He
bowed to Elric of Melnibon. "I thank you again, Sir Sorcerer, though I never thought to be helped by
one of the royal blood of Melnibon."
 Elric's expression was not without humor. "In Melnibon," he said, "I'm told it's tainted blood."
 "Tainted with mercy, perhaps."
 "Perhaps."
 Prince Carolak saluted them. "I hope you find peace, Prince Elric, as I have found it."
 "I fear my peace will more resemble that which Saxif D'Aan found," Elric said grimly.
"Nonetheless, I thank you for your good words, Prince Carolak."
 Then Carolak, laughing, had ridden his horse for the rail, leaped it, and vanished.
 There was a silence upon the ship. The remaining ruffians looked uncertainly from one to the other.
Elric addressed them:
 "Know you this-I have the key to the Crimson Gate -and only I have the knowledge to use it. Help
me sail the ship, and you'll have freedom from this world! What say you?"
 "Give us our orders, Captain," said a toothless individual, and he cackled with mirth. "It's the best
offer we've had in a hundred years or more!"


 VII

 It was Smiorgan who first saw the Crimson Gate. He held the great red gem in his hand and pointed
ahead.
 "There! There, Elric! Saxif D'Aan has not betrayed us!"
 The sea had begun to heave with huge, turbulent waves, and with the mainsail still tangled upon the
deck, it was all that the crew could do to control the ship, but the chance of escape from the world of the
blue sun made them work with every ounce of energy and, slowly, the golden battle-barge neared the 
towering crimson pillars.
 The pillars rose from the gray, roaring water, casting a peculiar light upon the crests of the waves.
They appeared to have little substance, and yet stood firm against the battering of the tons of water
lashing around them.
 "Let us hope they are wider apart than they look," said Elric. "It would be a hard enough task
steering through them in calm waters, let alone this kind of sea."
 "I'd best take the wheel, I think," said Count Smiorgan, handing Elric the gem, and he strode back
up the tilting deck, climbing to the covered wheelhouse and relieving the frightened man who stood
there.
 There was nothing Elric could do but watch as Smiorgan turned the huge vessel into the waves,
riding the tops as best he could, but sometimes descending with a rush which made Elric's heart rise to
his mouth. All around them, then, the cliffs of water threatened, but the ship was taking another wave
before the main force of water could crash onto her decks. For all this, Elric was quickly soaked through
and, though sense told him he would be best below, he clung to the rail, watching as Smiorgan steered
the ship with uncanny sureness toward the Crimson Gate.
 And then the deck was flooded with red light and Elric was half blinded. Gray water flew
everywhere; there came a dreadful scraping sound, then a snapping as oars broke against the pillars. The
ship shuddered and began to turn, sideways to the wind, but Smiorgan forced her around and suddenly
the quality of the light changed subtly, though the sea remained as turbulent as ever and Elric knew, deep
within him, that overhead, beyond the heavy clouds, a yellow sun was burning again.
 But now there came a creaking and a crashing from within the bowels of the battle-barge. The smell
of mold, which Elric had noted earlier, became stronger, almost overpowering.
 Smiorgan came hurrying back, having handed over the wheel. His face was pale again. "She's
breaking up, Elric," he called out, over the noise of the wind and the waves. He staggered as a huge wall
of water struck the ship and snatched away several planks from the deck. "She's falling apart, man!"
 "Saxif D'Aan tried to warn us of this!" Elric shouted back. "As he was kept alive by sorcery, so was
his ship. She was old before he sailed her to that world. While there, the sorcery which sustained her
remained strong- but on this plane it has no power at all. Look!" And he pulled at a piece of the rail,
crumbling the rotten wood with his fingers. "We must find a length of timber which is still good."
 At that moment a yard came crashing from the mast and struck the deck, bouncing, then rolling
toward them.
 Elric crawled up the sloping deck until he could grasp the spar and test it. "This one's still good. Use
your belt or whatever else you can and tie yourself to it!"
 The wind wailed through the disintegrating rigging of the ship; the sea smashed at the sides, driving
great holes below the waterline.
 The ruffians who had crewed her were in a state of complete panic, some trying to unship small
boats which crumbled even as they swung them out, others lying flat against the rotted decks and praying
to whatever gods they still worshiped.
 Elric strapped himself to the broken yard as firmly as he could and Smiorgan followed his example.
The next wave to hit the ship full on lifted them with it, cleanly over what remained of the rail and into
the chilling, shouting waters of that terrible sea.
 Elric kept his mouth tight shut against swallowing too much water and reflected on the irony of his
situation. It seemed that, having escaped so much, he was to die a very ordinary death, by drowning.
 It was not long before his senses left him and he gave himself up to the swirling and somehow
friendly waters of the ocean.
 He awoke, struggling.
 There were hands upon him. He strove to fight them off, but he was too weak. Someone laughed, a
rough, good-humored sound.
 The water no longer roared and crashed around him. The wind no longer howled. Instead there was 
a gentler movement. He heard waves lapping against timber. He was aboard another ship.
 He opened his eyes, blinking in warm, yellow sunlight. Red-cheeked Vilmirian sailors grinned
down at him. "You're a lucky man-if man you be!" said one.
 "My friend?" Elric sought for Smiorgan.
 "He was in better shape than were you. He's down in Duke Avan's cabin now."
 "Duke Avan?" Elric knew the name, but in his dazed condition could remember nothing to help him
place the man. "You saved us?"
 "Aye. We found you both drifting, tied to a broken yard carved with the strangest designs I've ever
seen. A Melnibonan craft, was she?"
 "Yes, but rather old."
 They helped him to his feet. They had stripped him of his clothes and wrapped him in woolen
blankets. The sun was already drying his hair. He was very weak. He said:
 "My sword?"
 "Duke Avan has it, below."
 "Tell him to be careful of it."
 "We're sure he will."
 "This way," said another. "The duke awaits you."


 Book THREE

 SAILING TO THE PAST


 I

 Elric sat back in the comfortable, well-padded chair and accepted the wine cup handed him by his
host. While Smiorgan ate his fill of the hot food provided for them, Elric and Duke Avan appraised one
another.
 Duke Avan was a man of about forty, with a square, handsome face. He was dressed in a gilded
silver breastplate, over which was arranged a white cloak. His britches, tucked into black knee-length
boots, were of cream-colored doeskin. On a small sea-table at his elbow rested his helmet, crested with
scarlet feathers.
 "I am honored, sir, to have you as my guest," said Duke Avan. "I know you to be Elric of
Melnibon. I have been seeking you for several months, ever since news came to me that you had left
your homeland (and your power) behind and were wandering, as it were, incognito in the Young
Kingdoms."
 "You know much, sir."
 "I, too, am a traveler by choice. I almost caught up with you in Pikarayd, but I gather there was
some sort of trouble there. You left quickly and then I lost your trail altogether. I was about to give up
looking for your aid when, by the greatest of good fortune, I found you floating in the water!" Duke
Avan laughed.
 "You have the advantage of me," said Elric, smiling. "You raise many questions."
 "He's Avan Astran of Old Hrolmar," grunted Count Smiorgan from the other side of a huge ham
bone. "He's well known as an adventurer-explorer-trader. His reputation's the best. We can trust him,
Elric."
 "I recall the name now," Elric told the duke. "But why should you seek my aid?"
 The smell of the food from the table had at last impinged and Elric got up. "Would you mind if I ate
something while you explained, Duke Avan?"
 "Eat your fill, Prince Elric. I am honored to have you as a guest."
 "You have saved my life, sir. I have never had it saved so courteously!"
 Duke Avan smiled. "I have never before had the pleasure of, let us say, catching so courteous a fish.
If I were a superstitious man, Prince Elric, I should guess that some other force threw us together in this
way."
 "I prefer to think of it as coincidence," said the albino, beginning to eat. "Now, sir, tell me how I
can aid you."
 "I shall not hold you to any bargain, merely because I have been lucky enough to save your life,"
said Duke Avan Astran; "please bear that in mind."
 "I shall, sir."
 Duke Avan stroked the feathers of his helmet. "I have explored most of the world, as Count
Smiorgan rightly says. I have been to your own Melnibon and I have even ventured east, to Elwher and
the Unknown Kingdoms. I have been to Myyrrhn, where the Winged Folk live. I have traveled as far as
World's Edge and hope one day to go beyond. But I have never crossed the Boiling Sea and I know only
a small stretch of coast along the western continent-the continent that has no name. Have you been there,
Elric, in your travels?"
 The albino shook his head. "I seek experience of other cultures, other civilizations-that is why I
travel. There has been nothing, so far, to take me there. The continent is largely uninhabited, and then,
where it is inhabited, only by savages, is it not?"
 "So we are told."
 "You have other intelligence?"
 "You know that there is some evidence," said Duke Avan in a deliberate tone, "that your own
ancestors came originally from that mainland?"
 "Evidence?" Elric pretended lack of interest. "A few legends, that is all."
 "One of those legends speaks of a city older than dreaming Imrryr. A city that still exists in the deep
jungles of the west."
 Elric recalled his conversation with Earl Saxif D'Aan, and he smiled to himself. "You mean R'lin
K'ren A'a?"
 "Aye. A strange name." Duke Avan Astran leaned forward, his eyes alight with delighted curiosity.
"You pronounce it more fluently than could I. You speak the secret tongue, the High Tongue, the Speech
of Kings...."
 "Of course."
 "You are forbidden to teach it to any but your own children, are you not?"
 "You appear conversant with the customs of Melnibon, Duke Avan," Elric said, his lids falling so
that they half covered his eyes. He leaned back in his seat as he bit into a piece of fresh bread with relish.
"Do you know what the words mean?"
 "I have been told that they mean simply 'Where the High Ones Meet' in the ancient speech of
Melnibon," Duke Avan Astran told him.
 Elric inclined his head. "That is so. Doubtless only a small town, in reality. Where local chiefs
gathered, perhaps once a year, to discuss the price of grain."
 "You believe that, Prince Elric?"
 Elric inspected a covered dish. He helped himself to veal in a rich, sweet sauce. "No," he said.
 "You believe, then, that there was an ancient civilization even before your own, from which your
own culture sprang? You believe that R'lin K'ren A'a is still there, somewhere in the jungles of the
west?"
 Elric waited until he had swallowed. He shook his head.
 "No," he said. "I believe that it does not exist at all."
 "You are not curious about your ancestors?"
 "Should I be?"
 "They were said to be different in character from those who founded Melnibon. Gentler. . . ." Duke
Avan Astran looked deep into Elric's face.
 Elric laughed. "You are an intelligent man, Duke Avan of Old Hrolmar. You are a perceptive man.
Oh, and indeed you are a cunning man, sir!"
 Duke Avan grinned at the compliment. "And you know much more of the legends than you are
admitting, if I am not mistaken."
 "Possibly." Elric sighed as the food warmed him. "We are known as a secretive people, we of
Melnibon."
 "Yet," said Duke Avan, "you seem untypical. Who else would desert an empire to travel in lands
where his very race was hated?"
 "An emperor rules better, Duke Avan Astran, if he has close knowledge of the world in which he
rules."
 "Melnibon rules the Young Kingdoms no longer."
 "Her power is still great. But that, anyway, was not what I meant. I am of the opinion that the
Young Kingdoms offer something which Melnibon has lost."
 "Vitality?"
 "Perhaps."
 "Humanity!" grunted Count-Smiorgan Baldhead. "That is what your race has lost, Prince Elric. I
say nothing of you-but look at Earl Saxif D'Aan. How can one so wise be such a simpleton? He lost
everything-pride, love, power--because he had no humanity. And what humanity he had-why, it
destroyed him."
 "Some say it will destroy me," said Elric, "but perhaps 'humanity' is, indeed, what I seek to bring to
Melnibon, Count Smiorgan."
 "Then you will destroy your kingdom!" said Smiorgan bluntly. "It is too late to save Melnibon."
 "Perhaps I can help you find what you seek, Prince Elric," said Duke Avan Astran quietly. "Perhaps
there is time to save Melnibon, if you feel such a mighty nation is in danger."
 "From within," said Elric. "But I speak too freely."
 "For a Melnibonan, that is true."
 "How did you come to hear of this city?" Elric wished to know. "No other man I have met in the
Young Kingdoms has heard of R'lin K'ren A'a."
 "It is marked on a map I have."
 Deliberately, Elric chewed his meat and swallowed it "The map is doubtless a forgery."
 "Perhaps. Do you recall anything else of the legend of R'lin K'ren A'a?"
 "There is the story of the Creature Doomed to Live." Elric pushed the food aside and poured wine
for himself. "The city is said to have received its name because the Lords of the Higher Worlds once met
there to decide the rules of the Cosmic Struggle. They were overheard by the one inhabitant of the city
who had not flown when they came. When they discovered him, they doomed him to remain alive
forever, carrying the frightful knowledge in his head...."
 "I have heard that story, too. But the one that interests me is that the inhabitants of R'lin K'ren A'a
never returned to their city. Instead they struck northward and crossed the sea. Some reached an island
we now call Sorcerer's Isle while others went farther-blown by a great storm-and came at length to a
larger island inhabited by dragons whose venom caused all it touched to burn ... to Melnibon, in fact."
 "And you wish to test the truth of that story. Your interest is that of a scholar?"
 Duke Avan laughed. "Partly. But my main interest in R'lin K'ren A'a is more materialistic. For your
ancestors left a great treasure behind them when they fled their city. Particularly they abandoned an
image of Arioch, the Lord of Chaos-a monstrous image, carved in jade, whose eyes were two huge,
identical gems of a kind unknown anywhere else in all the lands of the Earth. Jewels from another plane
of existence. Jewels which could reveal all the secrets of the Higher Worlds, of the past and the future, of
the myriad planes of the cosmos...."
 "All cultures have similar legends. Wishful thinking, Duke Avan, that is all...."
 "But the Melnibonans had a culture unlike any others. The Melnibonans are not true men, as you
well know. Their powers are superior, their knowledge far greater...."
 "It was once thus," Elric said. "But that great power and knowledge is not mine. I have only a
fragment of it. . . ."
 "I did not seek you in Bakshaan and later in Jadmar because I believed you could verify what I have
heard. I did not cross the sea to Filkhar, then to Argimiliar and at last to Pikarayd because I thought you
would instantly confirm all that I have spoken of-I sought you because I think you the only man who
would wish to accompany me on a voyage which would give us the truth or falsehood to these legends
once and for all."
 Elric tilted his head and drained his wine-cup.
 "Cannot you do that for yourself? Why should you desire my company on the expedition? From
what I have heard of you, Duke Avan, you are not one who needs support in his venturings...."
 Duke Avan laughed. "I went alone to Elwher when my men deserted me in the Weeping Waste. It is
not in my nature to know physical fear. But I have survived my travels this long because I have shown
proper foresight and caution before setting off. Now it seems I must face dangers I cannot anticipatesorcery,
perhaps. It struck me, therefore, that I needed an ally who had some experience of fighting
sorcery. And since I would have no truck with the ordinary kind of wizard such as Pan Tang spawns, you
were my only choice. You seek knowledge, Prince Elric, just as I do. Indeed, it could be said that if it
had not been for your yearning for knowledge, your cousin would never have attempted to usurp the
Ruby Throne of Melnibon...."
 "Enough of that," Elric said bitterly. "Let's talk of this expedition. Where is the map?"
 "You will accompany me?"
 "Show me the map."
 Duke Avan drew a scroll from his pouch. "Here it is."
 "Where did you find it?"
 "On Melnibon."
 "You have been there recently?" Elric felt anger rise in him.
 Duke Avan raised a hand. "I went there with a group of traders and I gave much for a particular
casket which had been sealed, it seemed, for an eternity. Within that casket was this map." He spread out
the scroll on the table. Elric recognized the style and the script-the old High Speech of Melnibon. It was
a map of part of the western continent-more than he had ever seen on any other map. It showed a great
river winding into the interior for a hundred miles or more. The river appeared to flow through a jungle
and then divide into two rivers which later rejoined. The "island" of land thus formed had a black circle
marked on it. Against this circle, in the involved writing of ancient Melnibon, was the name R'lin K'ren
A'a. Elric inspected the scroll carefully. It did not seem to be a forgery.
 "Is this all you found?" he asked.
 "The scroll was sealed and this was embedded in the seal," Duke Avan said, handing something to
Elric.
 Elric held the object in his palm. It was a tiny ruby of a red so deep as to seem black at first, but
when he turned it into the light he saw an image at the center of the ruby and he recognized that image.
He frowned, then he said, "I will agree to your proposal, Duke Avan. Will you let me keep this?"
 "Do you know what it is?"
 "No. But I should like to find out. There is a memory somewhere in my head...."
 "Very well, take it. I will keep the map."
 "When did you have it in mind to set off?"
 Duke Avan's smile was sardonic. "We are already sailing around the southern coast to the Boiling
Sea."
 "There are few who have returned from that ocean," Elric murmured bitterly. He glanced across the 
table and saw that Smiorgan was imploring with his eyes for Elric not to have any part of Duke Avan's
scheme. Elric smiled at his friend. "The adventure is to my taste."
 Miserably, Smiorgan shrugged. "It seems it will be a little longer before I return to the Purple
Towns."


 II

 The coast of Lormyr had disappeared in warm mist and Duke Avan Astran's schooner dipped its
graceful prow toward the west and the Boiling Sea.
 The Vilmirian crew of the schooner were used to a less demanding climate and more casual work
than this and they went about their tasks, it seemed to Elric, with something of an aggrieved air.
 Standing beside Elric in the ship's poop, Count Smiorgan Baldhead wiped sweat from his pate and
growled: "Vilmirians are a lazy lot, Prince Elric. Duke Avan needs real sailors for a voyage of this kind.
I could have picked him a crew, given the chance...."
 Elric smiled. "Neither of us was given the chance, Count Smiorgan. It was a fait accompli. He's a
clever man, Duke Astran."
 "It is not a cleverness I entirely respect, for he offered us no real choice. A free man is a better
companion than a slave, says the old aphorism."
 "Why did you not disembark when you had the chance, then, Count Smiorgan?"
 "Because of the promise of treasure," said the black-bearded man frankly. "I would return with
honor to the Purple Towns. Forget you not that I commanded the fleet that was lost...."
 Elric understood.
 "My motives are straightforward," said Smiorgan. "Yours are much more complicated. You seem to
desire danger as other men desire lovemaking or drinking-as if in danger you find forgetfulness."
 "Is that not true of many professional soldiers?"
 "You are not a mere professional soldier, Elric. That you know as well as I."
 "Yet few of the dangers I have faced have helped me forget," Elric pointed out. "Rather they have
strengthened the reminder of what I am-of the dilemma I face. My own instincts war against the
traditions of my race." Elric drew a deep, melancholy breath. "I go where danger is because I think that
an answer might lie there- some reason for all this tragedy and paradox. Yet I know I shall never find it."
 "But it is why you sail to R'lin K'ren A'a, eh? You hope that your remote ancestors had the answer
you need?"
 "R'lin K'ren A'a is a myth. Even should the map prove genuine what shall we find but a few ruins?
Imrryr has stood for ten thousand years and she was built at least two centuries after my people settled
on Melnibon. Time will have taken R'lin K'ren A'a away."
 "And this statue, this Jade Man, Avan spoke of?"
 "If the statue ever existed, it could have been looted at any time in the past hundred centuries."
 "And the Creature Doomed to Live?"
 "A myth."
 "But you hope, do you not, that it is all as Duke Avan says . . . ?" Count Smiorgan put a hand on
Elric's arm. "Do you not?"
 Elric stared ahead, into the writhing steam which rose from the sea. He shook his head.
 "No, Count Smiorgan. I fear that it is all as Duke Avan says."
 The wind blew whimsically and the schooner's passage was slow as the heat grew greater and the
crew sweated still more and murmured fearfully. And upon each face, now, was a stricken look.
 Only Duke Avan seemed to retain his confidence. He called to them all to take heart; he told them
that they should all be rich soon; and he gave orders for the oars to be unshipped, for the wind could no
longer be trusted. They grumbled at this, stripping off their shirts to reveal skins as red as cooked 
lobsters. Duke Avan made a joke of that. But the Vilmirians no longer laughed at his jokes as they had
done in the milder seas of their home waters.
 Around the ship the sea bubbled and roared, and they navigated by their few instruments, for the
steam obscured everything.
 Once a green thing erupted from the sea and glared at them before disappearing.
 They ate and slept little and Elric rarely left the poop. Count Smiorgan bore the heat silently and
Duke Avan, seemingly oblivious to any discomfort, went cheerfully about the ship, calling
encouragement to his men.
 Count Smiorgan was fascinated by the waters. He had heard of them, but never crossed them.
"These are only the outer reaches of this sea, Elric," he said in some wonder. "Think what it must be like
at the middle."
 Elric grinned. "I would rather not. As it is, I fear I'll be boiled to death before another day has
passed."
 Passing by, Duke Avan heard him and clapped him on the shoulder. "Nonsense, Prince Elric! The
steam is good for you! There is nothing healthier!" Seemingly with pleasure, Duke Avan stretched his
limbs. "It cleans all the poisons from the system."
 Count Smiorgan offered him a glowering look and Duke Avan laughed. "Be of better cheer, Count
Smiorgan. According to my charts-such as they are-a couple of days will see us nearing the coasts of the
western continent."
 "The thought fails to raise my spirits very greatly," said Count Smiorgan, but he smiled, infected by
Avan's good humor.
 But shortly thereafter the sea grew slowly less frenetic and the steam began to disperse until the
heat became more tolerable.
 At last they emerged into a calm ocean beneath a shimmering blue sky in which hung a red-gold
sun.
 But three of the Vilmirian crew had died to cross the Boiling Sea, and four more had a sickness in
them which made them cough a great deal, and shiver, and cry out in the night.
 For a while they were becalmed, but at last a soft wind began to blow and fill the schooner's sails
and soon they had sighted their first land-a little yellow island where they found fruit and a spring of
fresh water. Here, too, they buried the three men who had succumbed to the sickness of the Boiling Sea,
for the Vilmirians had refused to have them buried in the ocean on the grounds that the bodies would be
"stewed like meat in a pot."
 While the schooner lay at anchor, just off the island, Duke Avan called Elric to his cabin and
showed him, for a second time, that ancient map.
 Pale golden sunlight filtered through the cabin's ports and fell upon the old parchment, beaten from
the skin of a beast long since extinct, as Elric and Duke Avan Astran of Old Hrolmar bent over it.
 "See," Duke Avan said, pointing. "This island's marked. The map's scale seems reasonably accurate.
Another three days and we shall be at the mouth of the river."
 Elric nodded. "But it would be wise to rest here for a while until our strength is fully restored and
the morale of the crew is raised higher. There are reasons, after all, why men have avoided the jungles of
the west over the centuries."
 "Certainly there are savages there-some say they are not even human-but I'm confident we can deal
with those dangers. I have much experience of strange territories, Prince Elric."
 "But you said yourself you feared other dangers."
 "True. Very well, we'll do as you suggest"
 On the fourth day a strong wind began to blow from the east and they raised anchor. The schooner
leaped over the waves under only half her canvas and the crew saw this as a good omen.
 "They are mindless fools," Smiorgan said as they stood clinging to the rigging in the prow. "The
time will come when they will wish they were suffering the cleaner hardships of the Boiling Sea. This 
journey, Elric, could benefit none of us, even if the riches of R'lin K'ren A'a are still there."
 But Elric did not answer. He was lost in strange thoughts, unusual thoughts for him, for he was
remembering his childhood, his mother and his father. They had been the last true rulers of the Bright
Empire-proud, insouciant, cruel. They had expected him-perhaps because of his strange albinism-to
restore the glories of Melnibon. Instead he threatened to destroy what was left of that glory. They, like
himself, had had no real place in this new age of the Young Kingdoms, but they had refused to
acknowledge it. This journey to the western continent, to the land of his ancestors, had a peculiar
attraction for him. Here no new nations had emerged. The continent had, as far as he knew, remained the
same since R'lin K'ren A'a had been abandoned. The jungles would be the jungles his folk had known,
the land would be the land that had given birth to his peculiar race, molded the character of its people
with their somber pleasures, then-melancholy arts, and their dark delights. Had his ancestors felt this
agony of knowledge, this impotence in the face of the understanding that existence had no point, no
purpose, no hope? Was this why they had built their civilization in that particular pattern, why they had
disdained the more placid, spiritual values of mankind's philosophers? He knew that many of the
intellectuals of the Young Kingdoms pitied the powerful folk of Melnibon as mad. But if they had been
mad and if they had imposed a madness upon the world that had lasted a hundred centuries, what had
made them so? Perhaps the secret did lie in R'lin K'ren A'a-not in any tangible form, but in the ambience
created by the dark jungles and the deep, old rivers. Perhaps here, at last, he would be able to feel at one
with himself.
 He ran his fingers through his milk-white hair and there was a kind of innocent anguish in his
crimson eyes. He might be the last of his kind and yet he was unlike his kind. Smiorgan had been wrong.
Elric knew that everything that existed had its opposite. In danger he might find peace. And yet, of
course, in peace there was danger. Being an imperfect creature in an imperfect world he would always
know paradox. And that was why in paradox there was always a kind of truth. That was why
philosophers and soothsayers flourished. In a perfect world there would be no place for them. In an
imperfect world the mysteries were always without solution and that was why there was always a great
choice of solutions.
 It was on the morning of the third day that the coast was sighted and the schooner steered her way
through the sandbanks of the great delta and anchored, at last, at the mouth of the dark and nameless
river.


 III

 Evening came and the sun began to set over the black outlines of the massive trees. A rich, ancient
smell came from the jungle and through the twilight echoed the cries of strange birds and beasts. Elric
was impatient to begin the quest up the river. Sleep-never welcome-was now impossible to achieve. He
stood unmoving on the deck, his eyes hardly blinking, his brain barely active, as if expecting something
to happen to him. The rays of the sun stained his face and threw black shadows over the deck and then it
was dark and still under the moon and the stars. He wanted the jungle to absorb him. He wanted to be
one with the trees and the shrubs and the creeping beasts. He wanted thought to disappear. He drew the
heavily scented air into his lungs as if that alone would make him become what at that moment he
desired to be. The drone of insects became a murmuring voice that called him into the heart of the old,
old forest. And yet he could not move-could not answer. And at length Count Smiorgan came up on deck
and touched his shoulder and said something and passively he went below to his bunk and wrapped
himself in his cloak and lay there, still listening to the voice of the jungle.
 Even Duke Avan seemed in a more introspective mood than usual when they upped anchor the next
morning and began to row against the sluggish current. There were few gaps in the foliage above their
heads and they had the impression that they were entering a huge, gloomy tunnel, leaving the sunlight 
behind with the sea. Bright plants twined among the vines that hung from the leafy canopy and caught in
the ship's masts as they moved. Ratlike animals with long arms swung through the branches and peered
at them with bright, knowing eyes. The river turned and the sea was no longer in sight. Shafts of sunlight
filtered down to the deck and the light had a greenish tinge to it. Elric became more alert than he had
ever been since he agreed to accompany Duke Avan. He took a keen interest in every detail of the jungle
and the black river over which moved schools of insects like agitated clouds of mist and in which
blossoms drifted like drops of blood in ink. Everywhere were rustlings, sudden squawks, barks and wet
noises made by fish or river animals as they hunted the prey disturbed by the ship's oars which cut into
the great clumps of weed and sent the things that hid there scurrying. The others began to complain of
insect bites, but Elric was not troubled by them, perhaps because no insect could desire his deficient
blood.
 Duke Avan passed him on the deck. The Vilmirian slapped at his forehead. "You seem more
cheerful, Prince Elric."
 Elric smiled absently. "Perhaps I am."
 "I must admit I personally find all this a bit oppressive. I'll be glad when we reach the city."
 "You are still convinced you'll find it?"
 "I'll be convinced otherwise when I've explored every inch of the island we're bound for."
 So absorbed had he become in the atmosphere of the jungle that Elric was hardly aware of the ship
or his companions. The ship beat very slowly up the river, moving at little more than walking speed.
 A few days passed, but Elric scarcely noticed, for the jungle did not change-and then the river
widened and the canopy parted and the wide, hot sky was suddenly full of huge birds crowding upward
as the ship disturbed them. All but Elric were pleased to be under the open sky again and spirits rose.
Elric went below.
 The attack on the ship came almost immediately. There was a whistling noise and a scream and a
sailor writhed and fell over clutching at a gray thin semicircle of something which had buried itself in his
stomach. An upper yard came crashing to the deck, bringing sail and rigging with it. A headless body
took four paces toward the poop deck before collapsing, the blood pumping from the obscene bole that
was its neck. And everywhere was the thin whistling noise. Elric heard the sounds from below and came
back instantly, buckling on his sword. The first face he saw was Smiorgan's. The bald-pated man looked
perturbed as he crouched against a rail on the starboard side. Elric had the impression of gray blurs
whistling past, slashing into flesh and rigging, wood and canvas. Some fell to the deck and he saw that
they were thin disks of crystalline rock, about a foot in diameter. They were being hurled from both
banks of the river and there was no protection against them.
 He tried to see who was throwing the disks and glimpsed something moving in the trees along the
right bank. Then the disks ceased suddenly and there was a pause before some of the sailors dashed
across the deck to seek better cover. Duke Avan suddenly appeared in the stern. He had unsheathed his
sword.
 "Get below. Get your bucklers and any armor you can find. Bring bows. Arm yourselves, men, or
you're finished."
 And as he spoke their attackers broke from the trees and began to wade into the water. No more
disks came and it seemed likely they had exhausted their supply.
 "By Chardros!" Avan gasped. "Are these real creatures or some sorcerer's conjurings?"
 The things were essentially reptilian but with feathery crests and neck wattles, though their faces
were almost human. Their forelegs were like the arms and hands of men, but their hindlegs were
incredibly long and storklike. Balanced on these legs, their bodies towered over the water. They carried
great clubs in which slits had been cut and doubtless these were what they used to hurl the crystalline
disks. Staring at their faces, Elric was horrified. In some subtle way they reminded him of the
characteristic faces of his own folk-the folk of Melnibon. Were these creatures his cousins? Or were
they a species from which his people had evolved? He stopped asking the questions as an intense hatred 
for the creatures filled him. They were obscene: sight of them brought bile into his throat. Without
thinking, he drew Stormbringer from its sheath.
 The Black Sword began to howl and the familiar black radiance spilled from it. The runes carved
into its blade pulsed a vivid scarlet which turned slowly to a deep purple and then to black once more.
 The creatures were wading through the water on their stiltlike legs and they paused when they saw
the sword, glancing at one another. And they were not the only ones unnerved by the sight, for Duke
Avan and his men paled, too.
 "Gods!" Avan yelled. "I know not which I prefer the look of-those who attack us or that which
defends us!"
 "Stay well away from that sword," Smiorgan warned. "It has the habit of killing more than its
master chooses."
 And now the reptilian savages were upon them, clutching at the ship's rails as the armed sailors
rushed back on deck to meet the attack.
 Clubs came at Elric from all sides, but Stormbringer shrieked and parried each blow. He held the
sword in both hands, whirling it this way and that, plowing great gashes in the scaly bodies.
 The creatures hissed and opened red mouths in agony and rage while their thick, black blood sank
into the waters of the river. Although from the legs upward they were only slightly larger than a tall, wellbuilt
man, they had more vitality than any human and the deepest cuts hardly seemed to affect them,
even when administered by Stormbringer. Elric was astonished at this resistance to the sword's power.
Often a nick was enough for the sword to draw a man's soul from him. These things seemed immune.
Perhaps they had no souls....
 He fought on, his hatred giving him strength.
 But elsewhere on the ship the sailors were being routed. Rails were torn off and the great clubs
crushed planks and brought down more rigging. The savages were intent on destroying the ship as well
as the crew. And there was little doubt, now, that they would be successful.
 Avan shouted to Elric. "By the names of all the gods, Prince Elric, can you not summon some
further sorcery? We are doomed else!"
 Elric knew Avan spoke truth. All around him the ship was being gradually pulled apart by the
hissing reptilian creatures. Most of them had sustained horrible wounds from the defenders, but only one
or two had collapsed. Elric began to suspect that they did, in fact, fight supernatural enemies.
 He backed away and sought shelter beneath a half-crushed doorway as he tried to concentrate on a
method of calling upon supernatural aid.
 He was panting with exhaustion and he clung to a beam as the ship rocked back and forth in the
water. He fought to clear his head.
 And then the incantation came to him. He was not sure if it was appropriate, but it was the only one
he could recall. His ancestors had made pacts, thousands of years before, with all the elementals who
controlled the animal world. In the past he had summoned help from various of these spirits but never
from the one he now sought to call. From his mouth began to issue the ancient, beautiful, and convoluted
words of Melnibon's High Speech.
 "King with Wings! Lord of all that work and are not seen, upon whose labors all else depends!
Nnuuurrrr'c'c of the Insect Folk, I summon thee!"
 Save for the motion of the ship, Elric ceased to be aware of all else happening around him. The
sounds of the fight dimmed and were heard no more as he sent his voice out beyond his plane of the
Earth into another-the plane dominated by King Nnuuurrrr'c'c of the Insects, paramount lord of his
people.
 In his ears now Elric heard a buzzing and gradually the buzzing formed itself in words.
 "Who art thou, mortal? What right hast thee to summon me?"
 "I am Elric, ruler of Melnibon. My ancestors aided thee, Nnuuurrrr'c'c."
 "Aye-but long ago."
 "And it is long ago that they last called on thee for thine aid!"
 "True. What aid dost thou now require, Elric of Melnibon?"
 "Look upon my plane. Thou wilt see that I am in danger. Canst thou abolish this danger, friend of
the Insects?"
 Now a filmy shape formed and could be seen as if through several layers of cloudy silk. Elric tried
to keep his eyes upon it, but it kept leaving his field of vision and then returning for a few moments. He
knew that he looked into another plane of the Earth.
 "Canst thou help me, Nnuuurrrr'c'c?"
 "Hast thou no patron of thine own species? Some Lord of Chaos who can aid thee?"
 "My patron is Arioch and he is a temperamental demon at best. These days he aids me little."
 "Then I must send thee allies, mortal. But call upon me no more when this is done."
 "I shall not summon thee again, Nnuuurrrr'c'c."
 The layers of film disappeared and with them the shape.
 The noise of the battle crashed once again on Elric's consciousness and he heard with sharper clarity
than before the screams of the sailors and the hissing of the reptilian savages and when he looked out
from his shelter he saw that at least half the crew were dead.
 As he came on deck Smiorgan ran up. "I thought you slain, Elric! What became of you?" He was
plainly relieved to see his friend still lived.
 "I sought aid from another plane-but it does not seem to have materialized."
 "I'm thinking we're doomed and had best try to swim downstream away from here and seek a hiding
place in the jungle," Smiorgan said.
 "What of Duke Avan? Is he dead?"
 "He lives. But those creatures are all but impervious to our weapons. This ship will sink ere long."
Smiorgan lurched as the deck tilted and he reached out to grab a trailing rope, letting his long sword
dangle by its wrist-thong. "They are not attacking the stern at present. We can slip into the water
there...."
 "I made a bargain with Duke Avan," Elric reminded the islander. "I cannot desert him."
 "Then we'll all perish!"
 "What's that?" Elric bent his head, listening intently.
 "I hear nothing."
 It was a whine which deepened in tone until it became a drone. Now Smiorgan heard it also and
looked about him, seeking the source of the sound. And suddenly he gasped, pointing upward. "Is that
the aid you sought?"
 There was a vast cloud of them, black against the blue of the sky. Every so often the sun would
flash on a dazzling color-a rich blue, green, or red. They came spiraling down toward the ship and now
both sides fell silent, staring skyward.
 The flying things were like huge dragonflies and the brightness and richness of their coloring was
breathtaking. It was their wings which made the droning sound which now began to increase in loudness
and heighten in pitch as the huge insects sped nearer.
 Realizing that they were the object of the attack the reptile men stumbled backward on their long
legs, trying to reach the shore before the gigantic insects were upon them.
 But it was too late for flight.
 The dragonflies settled on the savages until nothing could be seen of their bodies. The hissing
increased and sounded almost pitiful as the insects bore their victims down to the surface and then
inflicted on them whatever terrible death it was. Perhaps they stung with their tails- it was not possible
for the watchers to see.
 Sometimes a storklike leg would emerge from the water and thrash in the air for a moment. But
soon, just as the reptiles were covered by the insect bodies, so were their cries drowned by the strange 
and blood-chilling humming that arose on all sides.
 A sweating Duke Avan, sword still in hand, ran up the deck. "Is this your doing, Prince Elric?"
 Elric looked on with satisfaction, but the others were plainly disgusted. "It was," he said.
 "Then I thank you for your aid. This ship is holed in a dozen places and is letting in water at a
terrible rate. It's a wonder we have not yet sunk. I've given orders to begin rowing and I hope we make it
to the island in time." He pointed upstream. "There, you can just see it."
 "What if there are more of those savages there?" Smiorgan asked.
 Avan smiled grimly, indicating the farther shore. "Look." On their peculiar legs a dozen or more of
the reptiles were fleeing into the jungle, having witnessed the fate of their comrades. "They'll be
reluctant to attack us again, I think."
 Now the huge dragonflies were rising into the air again and Avan turned away as he glimpsed what
they had left behind. "By the gods, you work fierce sorcery, Prince Elric! Ugh!"
 Elric smiled and shrugged. "It is effective, Duke Avan." He sheathed his runesword. It seemed
reluctant to enter the scabbard and it moaned as if in resentment.
 Smiorgan glanced at it. "That blade looks as if it will want to feast soon, Elric, whether you desire it
or not."
 "Doubtless it will find something to feed on in the forest," said the albino. He stepped over a piece
of broken mast and went below.
 Count Smiorgan Baldhead looked at the new scum on the surface of the water and he shuddered.


 IV

 The wrecked schooner was almost awash when the crew clambered overboard with lines and began
the task of dragging it up the mud that formed the banks of the island. Before them was a wall of foliage
that seemed impenetrable. Smiorgan followed Elric, lowering himself into the shallows. They began to
wade ashore.
 As they left the water and set foot on the hard, baked earth, Smiorgan stared at the forest. No wind
moved the trees and a peculiar silence had descended. No birds called from the trees, no insects buzzed,
there were none of the barks and cries of animals they had heard on their journey upriver.
 "Those supernatural friends of yours seem to have frightened more than the savages away," the
black-bearded man murmured. "This place seems lifeless."
 Elric nodded. "It is strange."
 Duke Avan joined them. He had discarded his finery-ruined in the fight anyway-and now wore a
padded leather jerkin and doeskin breeches. His sword was at his side. "We'll have to leave most of our
men behind with the ship," he said regretfully. "They'll make what repairs they can while we press on to
find R'lin K'ren A'a." He tugged his light cloak about him. "Is it my imagination, or is there an odd
atmosphere?"
 "We have already remarked on it," Smiorgan said. "Life seems to have fled the island."
 Duke Avan grinned. "If all we face is as timid, we have nothing further to fear. I must admit, Prince
Elric, that had I wished you harm and then seen you conjure those monsters from thin air, I'd think twice
about getting too close to you! Thank you, by the way, for what you did. We should have perished by
now if it had not been for you."
 "It was for my aid that you asked me to accompany you," Elric said wearily. "Let's eat and rest and
then continue with our expedition."
 A shadow passed over Duke Avan's face then. Something in Elric's manner had disturbed him.
 Entering the jungle was no easy matter. Armed with axes the six members of the crew (all that
could be spared) began to hack at the undergrowth. And still the unnatural silence prevailed....
 By nightfall they were less than half a mile into the forest and completely exhausted. The forest was 
so thick that there was barely room to pitch their tent. The only light in the camp came from the small,
sputtering fire outside the tent. The crewmen slept where they could in the open.
 Elric could not sleep, but now it was not the jungle which kept him awake. He was puzzled by the
silence, for he was sure that it was not their presence which had driven all life away. There was not a
single small rodent, bird, or insect anywhere to be seen. There were no traces of animal life. The island
had been deserted of all but vegetation for a long while-perhaps for centuries or tens of centuries. He
remembered another part of the old legend of R'lin K'ren A'a. It had been said that when the gods came
to meet there not only the citizens fled, but also all the wildlife. Nothing had dared see the High Lords or
listen to their conversation. Elric shivered, turning his white head this way and that on the rolled cloak
that supported it, his crimson eyes tortured. If there were dangers on this island, they would be subtler
dangers than those they had faced on the river.
 The noise of their passage through the forest was the only sound to be heard on the island as they
forced their way on the next morning.
 With lodestone in one hand and map in the other, Duke Avan Astran sought to guide them,
directing his men where to cut their path. But the going became even slower and it was obvious that no
creatures had come this way for many ages.
 By the fourth day they had reached a natural clearing of flat volcanic rock and found a spring there.
Gratefully they made camp. Elric began to wash his face in the cool water when he heard a yell behind
him. He sprang up. One of the crewmen was reaching for an arrow and fitting it to his bow.
 "What is it?" Duke Avan called.
 "I saw something, my lord!"
 "Nonsense, there are no-"
 "Look!" The man drew back the string and let fly into the upper terraces of the forest. Something
did seem to stir then and Elric thought he saw a flash of gray among the trees.
 "Did you see what kind of creature it was?" Smiorgan asked the man.
 "No, master. I feared at first it was those reptiles again."
 "They're too frightened to follow us onto this island," Duke Avan reassured him.
 "I hope you're right," Smiorgan said nervously.
 "Then what could it have been?" Elric wondered.
 "I-I thought it was a man, master," the crewman stuttered.
 Elric stared thoughtfully into the trees. "A man?"
 Smiorgan asked, "You were hoping for this, Elric?"
 "I am not sure...."
 Duke Avan shrugged. "More likely the shadow of a cloud passing over the trees. According to my
calculations we should have reached the city by now."
 "You think, after all, that it does not exist?" Elric said.
 "I am beginning not to care, Prince Elric." The duke leaned against the bole of a huge tree, brushing
aside a vine which touched his face. "Still there's naught else to do. The ship won't be ready to sail yet."
He looked up into the branches. "I did not think I should miss those damned insects that plagued us on
our way here...."
 The crewman who had shot the arrow suddenly shouted again. "There! I saw him! It is a man!"
 While the others stared but failed to discern anything Duke Avan continued to lean against the tree.
"You saw nothing. There is nothing here to see."
 Elric turned toward him. "Give me the map and the lodestone, Duke Avan. I have a feeling I can
find the way."
 The Vilmirian shrugged, an expression of doubt on his square, handsome face. He handed the things
over to Elric.
 They rested the night and in the morning they continued, with Elric leading the way.
 And at noon they broke out of the forest and saw the ruins of R'lin K'ren A'a.


 V

 Nothing grew among the ruins of the city. The streets were broken and the walls of the houses had
fallen, but there were no weeds flowering in the cracks and it seemed that the city had but recently been
brought down by an earthquake. Only one thing still stood intact, towering over the ruins. It was a
gigantic statue of white, gray, and green jade-the statue of a naked youth with a face of almost feminine
beauty that turned sightless eyes toward the north.
 "The eyes!" Duke Avan Astran said. "They're gone!"
 The others said nothing as they stared at the statue and the ruins surrounding it. The area was
relatively small and the buildings had had little decoration. The inhabitants seemed to have been a
simple, well-to-do folk- totally unlike the Melnibonans of the Bright Empire. Elric could not believe
that the people of R'lin K'ren A'a had been his ancestors. They had been too sane.
 "The statue's already been looted," Duke Avan continued. "Our damned journey's been in vain!"
 Elric laughed. "Did you really think you would be able to prise the Jade Man's eyes from their
sockets, my lord?"
 The statue was as tall as any tower of the Dreaming City and the head alone must have been the size
of a reasonably large building. Duke Avan pursed his lips and refused to listen to Elric's mocking voice.
"We may yet find the journey worth our while," he said. "There were other treasures in R'lin K'ren A'a.
Come...."
 He led the way into the city.
 Very few of the buildings were even partially standing, but they were nonetheless fascinating if
only for the peculiar nature of their building materials, which were of a kind the travelers had never seen
before.
 The colors were many, but faded by time-soft reds and yellows and blues-and they flowed together
to make almost infinite combinations.
 Elric reached out to touch one wall and was surprised at the cool feel of the smooth material. It was
neither stone nor wood nor metal. Perhaps it had been brought here from another plane?
 He tried to visualize the city as it had been before it was deserted. The streets had been wide, there
had been no surrounding wall, the houses had been low and built around large courtyards. If this was,
indeed, the original home of his people, what had happened to change them from the peaceful citizens of
R'lin K'ren A'a to the insane builders of Imrryr's bizarre and dreaming towers? Elric had thought he
might find a solution to a mystery here, but instead he had found another mystery. It was his fate, he
thought, shrugging to himself.
 And then the first crystal disk hummed past his head and smashed against a collapsing wall.
 The next disk split the skull of a crewman and a third nicked Smiorgan's ear before they had thrown
themselves flat among the rubble.
 "They're vengeful, those creatures," Avan said with a hard smile. "They'll risk much to pay us back
for their comrades' deaths!"
 Terror was on the face of each surviving crewman and fear had begun to creep into Avan's eyes.
 More disks clattered nearby, but it was plain that the party was temporarily out of sight of the
reptiles. Smiorgan coughed as white dust rose from the rubble and caught in his throat.
 "You'd best summon those monstrous allies of yours again, Elric."
 Elric shook his head. "I cannot. My ally said he would not serve me a second time." He looked to
his left where the four walls of a small house still stood. There seemed to be no door, only a window.
 "Then call something," Count Smiorgan said urgently. "Anything."
 "I am not sure...."
 Then Elric rolled over and sprang for the shelter, flinging himself through the window to land on a 
pile of masonry that grazed his hands and knees.
 He staggered upright. In the distance he could see the huge blind statue of the god dominating the
city. This was said to be an image of Arioch-though it resembled no image of Arioch Elric had ever seen
manifested. Did that image protect R'lin K'ren A'a-or did it threaten it? Someone screamed. He glanced
through the opening and saw that a disk had landed and chopped through a man's forearm.
 He drew Stormbringer and raised it, facing the jade statue.
 "Arioch!" he cried. "Arioch-aid me!"
 Black light burst from the blade and it began to sing, as if joining in Elric's incantation.
 "Arioch!"
 Would the demon come? Often the patron of the kings of Melnibon refused to materialize,
claiming that more urgent business called him-business concerning the eternal struggle between Law and
Chaos.
 "Arioch!"
 Sword and man were now wreathed in a palpitating black mist and Elric's white face was flung
back, seeming to writhe as the mist writhed.
 "Arioch! I beg thee to aid me! It is Elric who calls thee!"
 And then a voice reached his ears. It was a soft, purring, reasonable voice. It was a tender voice.
 "Elric, I am fondest of thee. I love thee more than any other mortal-but aid thee I cannot-not yet."
 Elric cried desperately: "Then we are doomed to perish here!"
 "Thou canst escape this danger. Flee alone into the forest. Leave the others while thou hast time.
Thou hast a destiny to fulfill elsewhere and elsewhen...."
 "I will not desert them."
 "Thou art foolish, sweet Elric."
 "Arioch-since Melnibon's founding thou hast aided her kings. Aid her last king this day!"
 "I cannot dissipate my energies. A great struggle looms. And it would cost me much to return to
R'lin K'ren A'a. Flee now. Thou shalt be saved. Only the others will die."
 And then the Duke of Hell had gone. Elric sensed the passing of his presence. He frowned,
fingering his belt pouch, trying to recall something he had once heard. Slowly, he resheathed the
reluctant sword. Then there was a thump and Smiorgan stood panting before him.
 "Well, is aid on the way?"
 "I fear not." Elric shook his head in despair. "Once again Arioch refuses me. Once again he speaks
of a greater destiny-a need to conserve his strength."
 "Your ancestors could have picked a more tractable demon as their patron. Our reptilian friends are
closing in. Look. . . ." Smiorgan pointed to the outskirts of the city. A band of about a dozen stilt-legged
creatures were advancing, their huge clubs at the ready.
 There was a scuffling noise from the rubble on the other side of the wall and Avan appeared,
leading his men through the opening. He was cursing.
 "No extra aid is coming, I fear," Elric told him.
 The Vilmirian smiled grimly. "Then the monsters out there knew more than did we!"
 "It seems so."
 "We'll have to try to hide from them," Smiorgan said without much conviction. "We'd not survive a
fight."
 The little party left the ruined house and began to inch its way through what cover it could find,
moving gradually nearer to the center of the city and the statue of the Jade Man.
 A sharp hiss from behind them told them that the reptile warriors had sighted them again and
another Vilmirian fell with a crystal disk protruding from his back. They broke into a panicky run.
 Ahead now was a red building of several stories which still had its roof.
 "In there!" Duke Avan shouted.
 With some relief they dashed unhesitatingly up worn steps and through a series of dusty passages 
until they paused to catch their breath in a great, gloomy hall.
 The hall was completely empty and a little light filtered through cracks in the wall.
 "This place has lasted better than the others," Duke Avan said. "I wonder what its function was. A
fortress, perhaps."
 "They seem not to have been a warlike race," Smiorgan pointed out. "I suspect the building had
some other function."
 The three surviving crewmen were looking fearfully about them. They looked as if they would have
preferred to have faced the reptile warriors outside.
 Elric began to cross the floor and then paused as he saw something painted on the far wall.
 Smiorgan saw it too. "What's that, friend Elric?"
 Elric recognized the symbols as the written High Speech of old Melnibon, but it was subtly
different and it took him a short time to decipher its meaning.
 "Know you what it says, Elric?" Duke Avan murmured, joining them.
 "Aye-but it's cryptic enough. It says: If thou hast come to slay me, then thou art welcome. If thou
hast come without the means to awaken the Jade Man, then begone...."
 "Is it addressed to us, I wonder," Avan mused, "of has it been there for a long while?"
 Elric shrugged. "It could have been inscribed at any time during the past ten thousand years...."
 Smiorgan walked up to the wall and reached out to touch it. "I would say it was fairly recent," he
said. "The paint still being wet."
 Elric frowned. "Then there are inhabitants here still. Why do they not reveal themselves?"
 "Could those reptiles out there be the denizens of R'lin K'ren A'a?" Avan said. "There is nothing in
the legends that says they were humans who fled this place...."
 Elric's face clouded and he was about to make an angry reply when Smiorgan interrupted.
 "Perhaps there is just one inhabitant. Is that what you are thinking, Elric? The Creature Doomed to
Live? Those sentiments could be his...."
 Elric put his hands to his face and made no reply.
 "Come," Avan said. "We've no time to debate on legends." He strode across the floor and entered
another doorway, beginning to descend steps. As he reached the bottom they heard him gasp.
 The others joined him and saw that he stood on the threshold of another hall. But this one was ankledeep
in fragments of stuff that had been thin leaves of a metallic material which had the flexibility of
parchment. Around the walls were thousands of small holes, rank upon rank, each with a character
painted over it.
 "What is it?" Smiorgan asked.
 Elric stooped and picked up one of the fragments. This had half a Melnibonan character engraved
on it. There had even been an attempt to obliterate this.
 "It was a library," he said softly. "The library of my ancestors. Someone has tried to destroy it.
These scrolls must have been virtually indestructible, yet a great deal of effort has gone into making
them indecipherable." He kicked at the fragments. "Plainly our friend-or friends- is a consistent hater of
learning."
 "Plainly," Avan said bitterly. "Oh, the value of those scrolls to the scholar! All destroyed!"
 Elric shrugged. "To Limbo with the scholar-their value to me was quite considerable!"
 Smiorgan put a hand on his friend's arm and Elric shrugged it off. "I had hoped..."
 Smiorgan cocked his bald head. "Those reptiles have followed us into the building, by the sound of
it."
 They heard the distant sound of strange footsteps in the passages behind them.
 The little band of men moved as silently as they could through the ruined scrolls and crossed the
hall until they entered another corridor which led sharply upward.
 Then, suddenly, daylight was visible.
 Elric peered ahead. "The corridor has collapsed ahead of us and is blocked, by the look of it. The 
roof has caved in and we may be able to escape through the hole."
 They clambered upward over the fallen stones, glancing warily behind them for signs of their
pursuers.
 At last they emerged in the central square of the city. On the far sides of this square were placed the
feet of the great statue, which now towered high above their heads.
 Directly before them were two peculiar constructions which, unlike the rest of the buildings, were
completely whole. They were domed and faceted and were made of some glasslike substance which
defracted the rays of the sun.
 From below they heard the reptile men advancing down the corridor.
 "We'll seek shelter in the nearest of those domes," Elric said. He broke into a trot, leading the way.
 The others followed him through the irregularly shaped opening at the base of the dome.
 Once inside, however, they hesitated, shielding their eyes and blinking heavily as they tried to
discern their way.
 "It's like a maze of mirrors!" Smiorgan gasped. "By the gods, I've never seen a better. Was that its
function, I wonder."
 Corridors seemed to go off in all directions-yet they might be nothing more than reflections of the
passage they were in. Cautiously Elric began to continue farther into the maze, the five others following
him.
 "This smells of sorcery to me," Smiorgan muttered as they advanced. "Have we been forced into a
trap, I wonder."
 Elric drew his sword. It murmured softly-almost querulously.
 Everything shifted suddenly and the shapes of his companions grew dim.
 "Smiorgan! Duke Avan!"
 He heard voices murmuring, but they were not the voices of his friends.
 "Count Smiorgan!"
 But then the burly sea-lord faded away altogether and Elric was alone.


 VI

 He turned and a wall of red brilliance struck his eyes and blinded him.
 He called out and his voice was turned into a dismal wail which mocked him.
 He tried to move, but he could not tell whether he remained in the same spot or walked a dozen
miles.
 Now there was someone standing a few yards away, seemingly obscured by a screen of
multicolored transparent gems. He stepped forward and made to dash away the screen, but it vanished
and he stopped suddenly.
 He looked on a face of infinite sorrow.
 And the face was his own face, save that the man's coloring was normal and his hair was black.
 "What are you?" Elric said thickly.
 "I have had many names. One is Erekos. I have been many men. Perhaps I am all men."
 "But you are like me!"
 "I am you."
 "No!"
 The phantom's eyes held tears as it stared in pity at Elric.
 "Do not weep for me!" Elric roared. "I need no sympathy from you!"
 "Perhaps I weep for myself, for I know our fate."
 "And what is that?"
 "You would not understand."
 "Tell me."
 "Ask your gods."
 Elric raised his sword. Fiercely he said, "No-I'll have my answer from you!"
 And the phantom faded away.
 Elric shivered. Now the corridor was populated by a thousand such phantoms. Each murmured a
different name. Each wore different clothes. But each had his face, if not his coloring.
 "Begone!" he screamed. "Oh, Gods, what is this place?"
 And at his command they disappeared.
 "Elric?"
 The albino whirled, sword ready. But it was Duke Avan Astran of Old Hrolmar. He touched his
own face with trembling fingers, but said levelly, "I must tell you that I believe I am losing my sanity,
Prince Elric...."
 "What have you seen?"
 "Many things. I cannot describe them."
 "Where are Smiorgan and the others?"
 "Doubtless each went his separate way, as we did."
 Elric raised Stormbringer and brought the blade crashing against a crystal wall. The Black Sword
moaned, but the wall merely changed its position.
 But through a gap now Elric saw ordinary daylight "Come, Duke Avan-there is escape!"
 Avan, dazed, followed him and they stepped out of the crystal and found themselves in the central
square of R'lin K'ren A'a.
 But there were noises. Carts and chariots moved about the square. Stalls were erected on one side.
People moved peacefully about. And the Jade Man did not dominate the sky above the city. Here, there
was no Jade Man at all.
 Elric looked at the faces. They were the eldritch features of the folk of Melnibon. Yet these had a
different cast to them which he could not at first define. Then he recognized what they had. It was
tranquillity. He reached out his hand to touch one of the people.
 "Tell me, friend, what year... ?"
 But the man did not hear him. He walked by.
 Elric tried to stop several of the passersby, but not one could see or hear him.
 "How did they lose this peace?" Duke Avan asked wonderingly. "How did they become like you,
Prince Elric?"
 Elric almost snarled as he turned sharply to face the Vilmirian. "Be silent!"
 Duke Avan shrugged. "Perhaps this is merely an illusion."
 "Perhaps," Elric said sadly, "but I am sure this is how they lived-until the coming of the High
Ones."
 "You blame the gods, then?"
 "I blame the despair that the gods brought"
 Duke Avan nodded gravely. "I understand."
 He turned back toward the great crystal and then stood listening. "Do you hear that voice, Prince
Elric? What is it saying?"
 Elric heard the voice. It seemed to be coming from the crystal. It was speaking the old tongue of
Melnibon, but with a strange accent. "This way," it said. "This way."
 Elric paused. "I have no liking to return there."
 Avan said, "What choice have we?"
 They stepped together through the entrance.
 Again they were in the maze that could be one corridor or many and the voice was clearer. "Take
two paces to your right," it instructed.
 Avan glanced at Elric. "What was that?" Elric told him. "Shall we obey?" Avan asked.
 "Aye." There was resignation in the albino's voice.
 They took two paces to their right.
 "Now four to your left," said the voice.
 They took four paces to their left.
 "Now one forward."
 They emerged into the ruined square of R'lin K'ren A'a.
 Smiorgan and one Vilmirian crewman stood there.
 "Where are the others?" Avan demanded.
 "Ask him," Smiorgan said wearily, gesturing with the sword in his right hand.
 They stared at the man who was either an albino or a leper. He was completely naked and he bore a
distinct likeness to Elric. At first Elric thought this was another phantom, but then he saw that there were
also several differences in their faces. There was something sticking from the man's side, just above the
third rib. With a shock, Elric recognized it as the broken shaft of a Vilmirian arrow.
 The naked man nodded. "Aye-the arrow found its mark. But it could not slay me, for I am J'osui
C'reln Reyr...."
 "You believe yourself to be the Creature Doomed to Live," Elric murmured.
 "I am he." The man gave a bitter smile. "Do you think I try to deceive you?"
 Elric glanced at the arrow shaft and then shook his head.
 "You are ten thousand years old?" Avan stared at him.
 "What does he say?" asked J'osui C'reln Reyr of Elric. Elric translated.
 "Is that all it has been?" The man sighed. Then he looked intently at Elric. "You are of my race?"
 "It seems so."
 "Of what family?"
 "Of the royal line."
 "Then you have come at last. I, too, am of that line."
 "I believe you."
 "I notice that the Olab seek you."
 "The Olab?"
 "Those primitives with the clubs."
 "Aye. We encountered them on our journey upriver."
 "I will lead you to safety. Come."
 Elric allowed J'osui C'reln Reyr to take them across the square to where part of a tottering wall still
stood. The man then lifted a flagstone and showed them the steps leading down into darkness. They
followed him, descending cautiously as he caused the flagstone to lower itself above their heads. And
then they found themselves in a room lit by crude oil lamps. Save for a bed of dried grasses the room
was empty.
 "You live sparely," Elric said.
 "I have need for nothing else. My head is sufficiently furnished...."
 "Where do the Olab come from?" Elric asked.
 "They are but recently arrived in these parts. Scarcely a thousand years ago-or perhaps half that
time-they came from farther upriver after some quarrel with another tribe. They do not usually come to
the island. You must have killed many of them for them to wish you such harm."
 "We killed many."
 J'osui C'reln Reyr gestured at the others who were staring at him in some discomfort. "And these?
Primitives, also, eh? They are not of our folk."
 "There are few of our folk left."
 "What does he say?" Duke Avan asked.
 "He says that those reptile warriors are called the Olab," Elric told him.
 "And was it these Olab who stole the Jade Man's eyes?"
 When Elric translated the question the Creature Doomed to Live was astonished. "Did you not
know, then?"
 "Know what?"
 "Why, you have been in the Jade Man's eyes! Those great crystals in which you wandered-that is
what they are!"


 VII

 When Elric offered this information to Duke Avan, the Vilmirian burst into laughter. He flung his
head back and roared with mirth while the others looked gloomily on. The cloud that had fallen across
his features of late suddenly cleared and he became again the man whom Elric had first met.
 Smiorgan was the next to smile and even Elric acknowledged the irony of what had happened to
them.
 "Those crystals fell from his face like tears soon after the High Ones departed," continued J'osui
C'reln Reyr.
 "So the High Ones did come here."
 "Aye-the Jade Man brought the message and all the folk departed, having made their bargain with
him."
 "The Jade Man was not built by your people?"
 "The Jade Man is Duke Arioch of Hell. He strode from the forest one day and stood in the square
and told the people what was to come about-that our city lay at the center of some particular
configuration and that it was only there that the Lords of the Higher Worlds could meet."
 "And the bargain?"
 "In return for their city, our royal line might in the future increase their power with Arioch as their
patron. He would give them great knowledge and the means to build a new city elsewhere."
 "And they accepted this bargain without question?"
 "There was little choice, kinsman."
 Elric lowered his eyes to regard the dusty floor. "And thus they were corrupted," he murmured.
 "Only I refused to accept the pact. I did not wish to leave this city and I mistrusted Arioch. When all
others set off down the river, I remained here-where we are now-and I heard the Lords of the Higher
Worlds arrive and I heard them speak, laying down the rules under which Law and Chaos would fight
thereafter. When they had gone, I emerged. But Arioch-the Jade Man-was still here. He looked down on
me through his crystal eyes and he cursed me. When that was done the crystals fell and landed where
you now see them. Arioch's spirit departed, but his jade image was left behind."
 "And you still retain all memory of what transpired between the Lords of Law and Chaos?"
 "That is my doom."
 "Perhaps your fate was less harsh than that which befell those who left," Elric said quietly. "I am the
last inheritor of that particular doom...."
 J'osui C'reln Reyr looked puzzled and then he stared into Elric's eyes and an expression of pity
crossed his face. "I had not thought there was a worse fate-but now I believe there might be...."
 Elric said urgently, "Ease my soul, at least. I must know what passed between the High Lords in
those days. I must understand the nature of my existence-as you, at least, understand yours. Tell me, I
beg you!"
 J'osui C'reln Reyr frowned and he stared deeply into Elric's eyes. "Do you not know all my story,
then?"
 "Is there more?"
 "I can only remember what passed between the High Lords-but when I try to tell my knowledge
aloud or try to write it down, I cannot...."
 Elric grasped the man's shoulder. "You must try! You must try!"
 "I know that I cannot."
 Seeing the torture in Elric's face, Smiorgan came up to him. "What is it, Elric?"
 Elric's hand clutched his head. "Our journey has been useless." Unconsciously he used the old
Melnibonan tongue.
 "It need not be," said J'osui C'reln Reyr. "For me, at least." He paused. "Tell me, how did you find
this city? Was there a map?"
 Elric produced the map. "This one."
 "Aye, that is the one. Many centuries ago I put it into a casket which I placed in a small trunk. I
launched the trunk into the river, hoping that it would follow my people and they would know what it
was."
 "The casket was found in Melnibon, but no one had bothered to open it," Elric explained. "That
will give you an idea of what happened to the folk who left here...."
 The strange man nodded gravely. "And was there still a seal upon the map?"
 "There was. I have it."
 "An image of one of the manifestations of Arioch, embedded in a small ruby?"
 "Aye. I thought I recognized the image, but I could not place it."
 "The Image in the Gem," murmured J'osui C'reln Reyr. "As I prayed, it has returned-borne by one
of the royal line!"
 "What is its significance?"
 Smiorgan interrupted. "Will this fellow help us to escape, Elric? We are becoming somewhat
impatient. . . ."
 "Wait," the albino said. "I will tell you everything later."
 "The Image in the Gem could be the instrument of my release," said the Creature Doomed to Live.
"If he who possesses it is of the royal line, then he can command the Jade Man."
 "But why did you not use it?"
 "Because of the curse that was put on me. I had the power to command, but not to summon the
demon. It was a joke, I understand, of the High Lords."
 Elric saw bitter sadness in the eyes of J'osui C'reln Reyr. He looked at the white, naked flesh and the
white hair and the body that was neither old nor young, at the shaft of the arrow sticking out above the
third rib on the left side.
 "What must I do?" he asked.
 "You must summon Arioch and then you must command him to enter his body again and recover
his eyes so that he may see to walk away from R'lin K'ren A'a."
 "And when he walks away?"
 "The curse goes with him."
 Elric was thoughtful. If he did summon Arioch-who was plainly reluctant to come-and then
commanded him to do something he did not wish to do, he stood the chance of making an enemy of that
powerful, if unpredictable entity. Yet they were trapped here by the Olab warriors, with no means of
escaping them. If the Jade Man walked, the Olab would almost certainly flee and there would be time to
get back to the ship and reach the sea. He explained everything to his companions. Both Smiorgan and
Avan looked dubious and the remaining Vilmirian crewman looked positively terrified.
 "I must do it," Elric decided, "for the sake of this man. I must call Arioch and lift the doom that is
on R'lin K'ren A'a."
 "And bring a greater doom to us!" Duke Avan said, putting his hand automatically upon his swordhilt.
"No. I think we should take our chances with the Olab. Leave this man-he is mad-he raves. Let's be
on our way."
 "Go if you choose," Elric said. "But I will stay with the Creature Doomed to Live."
 "Then you will stay here forever. You cannot believe his story!"
 "But I do believe it."
 "You must come with us. Your sword will help. Without it, the Olab will certainly destroy us."
 "You saw that Stormbringer has little effect against the Olab."
 "And yet it has some. Do not desert me, Elric!"
 "I am not deserting you. I must summon Arioch. That summoning will be to your benefit, if not to
mine."
 "I am unconvinced."
 "It was my sorcery you wanted on this venture. Now you shall have my sorcery."
 Avan backed away. He seemed to fear something more than the Olab, more than the summoning.
He seemed to read a threat in Elric's face of which even Elric was unaware.
 "We must go outside," said J'osui C'reln Reyr. "We must stand beneath the Jade Man."
 "And when this is done," Elric asked suddenly, "how will we leave R'lin K'ren A'a?"
 "There is a boat. It has no provisions, but much of the city's treasure is on it. It lies at the west end
of the island."
 "That is some comfort," Elric said. "And you could not use it yourself?"
 "I could not leave."
 "Is that part of the curse?"
 "Aye-the curse of my timidity."
 "Timidity has kept you here ten thousand years?"
 "Aye...."
 They left the chamber and went out into the square. Night had fallen and a huge moon was in the
sky. From where Elric stood it seemed to frame the Jade Man's sightless head like a halo. It was
completely silent. Elric took the Image in the Gem from his pouch and held it between the forefinger and
thumb of his left hand. With his right he drew Stormbringer. Avan, Smiorgan, and the Vilmirian
crewman fell back.
 He stared up at the huge jade legs, the genitals, the torso, the arms, the head, and he raised his
sword in both hands and screamed:
 "Arioch!"
 Stormbringer's voice almost drowned his. It pulled in his hands; it threatened to leave his grasp
altogether as it howled.
 "Arioch!"
 All the watchers saw now was the throbbing, radiant sword, the white face and hands of the albino
and his crimson eyes glaring through the blackness.
 "Arioch!"
 And then a voice which was not Arioch's came to Elric's ears and it seemed that the sword itself
spoke.
 "Elric-Arioch must have blood and souls. Blood and souls, my lord...."
 "No. These are my friends and the Olab cannot be harmed by Stormbringer. Arioch must come
without the blood, without the souls."
 "Only those can summon him for certain!" said a voice, more clearly now. It was sardonic and it
seemed to come from behind him. He turned, but there was nothing there.
 He saw Duke Avan's nervous face, and as his eyes fixed on the Vilmirian's countenance, the sword
swung around, twisting against Elric's grip, and plunging toward the duke.
 "No!" cried Elric. "Stop!"
 But Stormbringer would not stop until it had plunged deep into Duke Avan's heart and quenched its
thirst. The crewman stood transfixed as he watched his master die.
 Duke Avan writhed. "Elric! What treachery do you ... ?"
 He screamed. "Ah, no!"
 He jerked. "Please..."
 He quivered. "My soul..."
 He died.
 Elric withdrew the sword and cut the crewman down as he ran to his master's aid. The action had
been without thought.
 "Now Arioch has his blood and his souls," he said coldly. "Let Arioch come!"
 Smiorgan and the Creature Doomed to Live had retreated, staring at the possessed Elric in horror.
The albino's face was cruel.
 "Let Arioch come!"
 "I am here, Elric."
 Elric whirled and saw that something stood in the shadow of the statue's legs-a shadow within a
shadow.
 "Arioch-thou must return to this manifestation and make it leave R'lin K'ren A'a forever."
 "I do not choose to, Elric."
 "Then I must command thee, Duke Arioch."
 "Command? Only he who possesses the Image in the Gem may command Arioch-and then only
once."
 "I have the Image in the Gem." Elric held up the tiny object. "See."
 The shadow within a shadow swirled for a moment as if in anger.
 "If I obey your command, you will set in motion a chain of events which you might not desire,"
Arioch said, speaking suddenly in Low Melnibonan as if to give extra gravity to his words.
 "Then let it be. I command you to enter the Jade Man and pick up its eyes so that it might walk
again. Then I command you to leave here and take the curse of the High Ones with you."
 Arioch replied, "When the Jade Man ceases to guard the place where the High Ones meet, then the
great struggle of the Upper Worlds begins on this plane."
 "I command thee, Arioch. Go into the Jade Man!"
 "You are an obstinate creature, Elric."
 "Go!" Elric raised Stormbringer. It seemed to sing in monstrous glee and it seemed at that moment
to be more powerful than Arioch himself, more powerful than all the Lords of the Higher Worlds.
 The ground shook. Fire suddenly blazed around the form of the great statue. The shadow within a
shadow disappeared.
 And the Jade Man stooped.
 Its great bulk bent over Elric and its hands reached past him and it groped for the two crystals that
lay on the ground. Then it found them and took one in each hand, straightening its back.
 Elric stumbled toward the far corner of the square where Smiorgan and J'osui C'reln Reyr already
crouched in terror.
 A fierce light now blazed from the Jade Man's eyes and the jade lips parted.
 "It is done, Elric!" said a huge voice.
 J'osui C'reln Reyr began to sob.
 "Then go, Arioch."
 "I go. The curse is lifted from R'lin K'ren A'a and from J'osui C'reln Reyr-but a greater curse now
lies upon your whole plane."
 "What is this, Arioch? Explain yourself!" Elric cried.
 "Soon you will have your explanation. Farewell!"
 The enormous legs of jade moved suddenly and in a single step had cleared the ruins and had begun
to crash through the jungle. In a moment the Jade Man had disappeared.
 Then the Creature Doomed to Live laughed. It was a strange joy that he voiced. Smiorgan blocked
his ears.
 "And now!" shouted J'osui C'reln Reyr. "Now your blade must take my life. I can die at last!"
 Elric passed his hand across his face. He had hardly been aware of any of the recent events. "No,"
he said in a dazed tone. "I cannot...."
 And Stormbringer flew from his hand-flew to the body of the Creature Doomed to Live and buried
itself in its chest.
 And as he died, J'osui C'reln Reyr laughed. He fell to the ground and his lips moved. A whisper
came from them. Elric stepped nearer to hear.
 "The sword has my knowledge now. My burden has left me."
 The eyes closed.
 J'osui C'reln Reyr's ten-thousand-year life-span had ended.
 Weakly, Elric withdrew Stormbringer and sheathed it. He stared down at the body of the Creature
Doomed to Live and then he looked up, questioningly, at Smiorgan.
 The burly sea-lord turned away.
 The sun began to rise. Gray dawn came. Elric watched the corpse of J'osui C'reln Reyr turn to
powder that was stirred by the wind and mixed with the dust of the ruins. He walked back across the
square to where Duke Avan's twisted body lay and he fell to his knees beside it.
 "You were warned, Duke Avan Astran of Old Hrolmar, that ill befell those who linked their
fortunes with Elric of Melnibon. But you thought otherwise. Now you know." With a sigh he got to his
feet.
 Smiorgan stood beside him. The sun was now touching the taller parts of the ruins. Smiorgan
reached out and gripped his friend's shoulder.
 "The Olab have vanished. I think they've had their fill of sorcery."
 "Another man has been destroyed by me, Smiorgan. Am I forever to be tied to this cursed sword? I
must discover a way to rid myself of it or my heavy conscience will bear me down so that I cannot rise at
all."
 Smiorgan cleared his throat, but was otherwise silent.
 "I will lay Duke Avan to rest," Elric said. "You go back to where we left the ship and tell the men
that we come."
 Smiorgan began to stride across the square toward the east.
 Elric tenderly picked up the body of Duke Avan and went toward the opposite side of the square, to
the underground room where the Creature Doomed to Live had lived out his life for ten thousand years.
 It seemed so unreal to Elric now, but he knew that it had not been a dream, for the Jade Man had
gone. His tracks could be seen through the jungle. Whole clumps of trees had been flattened.
 He reached the place and descended the stairs and laid Duke Avan down on the bed of dried
grasses. Then he took the duke's dagger and, for want of anything else, dipped it in the duke's blood and
wrote on the wall above the corpse:
 This was Duke Avan Astran of Old Hrolmar. He explored the world and brought much knowledge
and treasure back to Vilmir, his land. He dreamed and became lost in the dream of another and so died.
He enriched the Young Kingdoms-and thus encouraged another dream. He died so that the Creature
Doomed to Live might die, as he desired....
 Elric paused. Then he threw down the dagger. He could not justify his own feelings of guilt by
composing a high-sounding epitaph for the man he had slain.
 He stood there, breathing heavily, then once again picked up the dagger.
 He died because Elric of Melnibon desired a peace and a knowledge he could never find. He died
by the Black Sword.

 Outside in the middle of the square, at noon, still lay the lonely body of the last Vilmirian crewman.
Nobody had known his name. Nobody felt grief for him or tried to compose an epitaph for him. The
dead Vilmirian had died for no high purpose, followed no fabulous dream. Even in death his body would
fulfill no function. On this island there was no carrion to feed. In the dust of the city there was no earth to 
fertilize.
 Elric came back into the square and saw the body. For a moment, to Elric it symbolized everything
that had transpired here and would transpire later.
 "There is no purpose," he murmured.
 Perhaps his remote ancestors had, after all, realized that, but had not cared. It had taken the Jade
Man to make them care and then go mad in their anguish. The knowledge had caused them to close their
minds to much.
 "Elric!"
 It was Smiorgan returning. Elric looked up.
 "The Olab dealt with the crew and the ship before they came after us. They're all slain. The boat is
destroyed."
 Elric remembered something the Creature Doomed to Live had told him. "There is another boat," he
said. "On the east side of the island."
 It took them the rest of the day and all of that night to discover where J'osui C'reln Reyr had hidden
his boat. They pulled it down to the water in the diffused light of the morning and they inspected it.
 "It's a sturdy boat," said Count Smiorgan approvingly. "By the look of it, it's made of that same
strange material we saw in the library of R'lin K'ren A'a." He climbed in and searched through the
lockers.
 Elric was staring back at the city, thinking of a man who might have become his friend, just as
Count Smiorgan had become his friend. He had no friends, save Cymoril, in Melnibon. He sighed.
 Smiorgan had opened several lockers and was grinning at what he saw there. "Pray the gods I return
safe to the Purple Towns-we have what I sought! Look, Elric! Treasure! We have benefited from this
venture, after all!"
 "Aye. . . ." Elric's mind was on other things. He forced himself to think of more practical matters.
"But the jewels will not feed us, Count Smiorgan," he said. "It will be a long journey home."
 "Home?" Count Smiorgan straightened his great back, a bunch of necklaces in either fist.
"Melnibon?"
 "The Young Kingdoms. You offered to guest me in your house, as I recall."
 "For the rest of your life, if you wish. You saved my life, friend Elric-now you have helped me save
my honor."
 "These past events have not disturbed you? You saw what my blade can do-to friends as well as
enemies."
 "We do not brood, we of the Purple Towns," said Count Smiorgan seriously. "And we are not fickle
in our friendships. You know an anguish, Prince Elric, that I'll never feel-never understand-but I have
already given you my trust. Why should I take it away again? That is not how we are taught to behave in
the Purple Towns." Count Smiorgan brushed at his black beard and he winked. "I saw some cases of
provisions among the wreckage of Avan's schooner. We'll sail around the island and pick them up."
 Elric tried to shake the black mood from himself, but it was hard, for he had slain a man who had
trusted him, and Smiorgan's talk of trust only made the guilt heavier.
 Together they launched the boat into the weed-thick water and Elric looked back once more at the
silent forest and a shiver passed through him. He thought of all the hopes he had entertained on the
journey upriver and he cursed himself for a fool.
 He tried to think back, to work out how he had come to be in this place, but too much of the past
was confused with those singularly graphic dreams to which he was prone. Had Saxif D'Aan and the
world of the blue sun been real? Even now, it faded. Was this place real? There was something
dreamlike about it. It seemed to him he had sailed on many fateful seas since he had fled from Pikarayd.
Now the promise of the peace of the Purple Towns was very dear to him.
 Soon the time must come when he must return to Cymoril and the Dreaming City, to decide if he
was ready to take up the responsibilities of the Bright Empire of Melnibon, but until that moment he 
would guest with his new friend, Smiorgan, and learn the ways of the simpler, more direct folk of Menii.
 As they raised the sail and began to move with the current, Elric said to Smiorgan suddenly, "You
trust me, then, Count Smiorgan?"
 The sea-lord was a little surprised by the directness of the question. He fingered his beard. "Aye,"
he said at length, "as a man. But we live in cynical times, Prince Elric. Even the gods have lost their
innocence, have they not?"
 Elric was puzzled. "Do you think that I shall ever betray you-as-as I betrayed Avan, back there?"
 Smiorgan shook his head. "It's not in my nature to speculate upon such matters. You are loyal,
Prince Elric. You feign cynicism, yet I think I've rarely met a man so much in need of a little real
cynicism." He smiled. "Your sword betrayed you, did it not?"
 "To serve me, I suppose."
 "Aye. There's the irony of it. Man may trust man, Prince Elric, but perhaps we'll never have a truly
sane world until men learn to trust mankind. That would mean the death of magic, I think."
 And it seemed to Elric, then, that his runesword trembled at his side, and moaned very faintly, as if
it were disturbed by Count Smiorgan's words.


END Book 2
The Weird Of The White Wolf
By
Michael Moorcock
Prologue
THE DREAM OF EARL AUBEC
In which we learn something of how the Age of the Young Kingdoms emerged and of the part played by
the Dark Lady, Myshella, whose fate would later be intertwined with that of Elric of Melnibone
From the glassless window of the stone tower it was possible to see the wide river winding off between
loose, brown banks, through the heaped terrain of solid green copses which blended very gradually into
the mass of the forest proper. And out of the forest, the cliff rose, grey and light-green, up and up, the
rock darkening, lichen-covered, to merge with the lower, and even more massive, stones of the castle. It
was the castle which dominated the countryside in three directions, drawing the eye from river, rock, or
forest. Its walls were high and of thick granite, with towers; a dense field of towers, grouped so as to
shadow one another.
Aubec of Malador marveled and wondered how human builders could ever have constructed it, save by
sorcery. Brooding and mysterious, the castle seemed to have a defiant air, for it stood on the very edge of
the world.
At this moment the lowering sky cast a strange, deep-yellow light against the western sides of the
towers, intensifying the blackness untouched by it. Huge billows of blue sky rent the general racing
greyness above, and mounds of red cloud crept through to blend and produce more and subtler
colourings. Yet, though the sky was impressive, it could not take the gaze away from the ponderous
series of man-made crags that were Castle Kaneloon. Earl Aubec of Malador did not turn from the window
until it was completely dark outside; forest, cliff, and castle but shadowy tones against the overall
blackness. He passed a heavy, knotted hand over his almost bald scalp and thoughtfully went towards the
heap of straw which was his intended bed. The straw was piled in a niche created by a buttress and the
outer wall and the room was well-lighted by Malador's lantern. But the air was cold as he lay down on
the straw with his hand dose to the two-handed broadsword of prodigious size. This was his only
weapon. It looked as if it had been forged for a giant-Malador was virtually that himself-with its wide
crosspiece and heavy, stone-encrusted hilt and five-foot blade, smooth and broad. Beside it was
Malador's old, heavy armour, the casque balanced on top with its somewhat tattered black plumes
waving slightly in a current of air from the window. Malador slept.
His dreams, as usual, were turbulent: of mighty armies surging across the blazing landscapes, curling
banners bearing the blazons of a hundred nations, forests of shining lance-tips, seas of tossing helmets,
the brave, wild blasts of the war-horns, the clatter of hooves, and the songs and cries and shouts of sol
diers. These were dreams of earlier times, of his youth when, for Queen Eloarde of Klant, he had
conquered all the Southern nations-almost to the edge of the world. Only Kaneloon, on the very edge,
had he not conquered, and this because no army would follow him there.
For one of so martial an appearance, these dreams were surprisingly unwelcome, and Malador woke
several times that night, shaking his head in an at-tempt to rid himself of them.
He would rather have dreamed of Eloarde, though she was the cause of his restlessness, but he saw
nothing of her in his sleep; nothing of her soft, black hair that billowed around her pale face, noth-ing of
her green eyes and red lips and her proud, disdainful posture. Eloarde had assigned him to this quest and
he had not gone willingly, though he had no choice, for as well as his mistress she was also his Queen.
The Champion was traditionally her lover- and it was unthinkable to Earl Aubec that any other condition
should exist. It was his place, as Champion of Klant, to obey and go forth from her palace to seek Castle
Kaneloon alone and conquer it and de-clare it part of her Empire, so that it could be said Queen Eloarde's 
domain stretched from the Dragon Sea to World's Edge.
Nothing lay beyond World's Edge-nothing save the swirling stuff of unformed Chaos which stretched
away from the Cliffs of Kaneloon for eternity, roiling and broiling, multicoloured, full of monstrous halfshapes-for
Earth alone was Lawful and constituted of ordered matter, drifting in the sea of Chaos-stuff as
it had done for aeons.
In the morning, Earl Aubec of Malador extin-guished the lantern which he had allowed to remain alight,
drew greaves and hauberk on to him, placed his black plumed helm upon his head, put his broad-sword
over his shoulder and sallied out of the stone tower which was all that remained whole of some an-cient
edifice.
His leathern-shod feet stumbled over stones that seemed partially dissolved, as if Chaos had once lapped
here instead of against the towering Cliffs of Kaneloon. That, of course, was quite impossible, since
Earth's boundaries were known to be constant. Castle Kaneloon had seemed closer the night be-fore and
that, he now realised, was, because it was so huge. He followed the river, his feet sinking in the loamy
soil, the great branches of the trees shading him from the increasingly hot sun as he made his way
towards the cliffs. Kaneloon was now out of sight, high above him. Every so often he used his sword as
an axe to clear his way through the places where the foliage was particularly thick. He rested several
times, drinking the cold water of the river and mopping his face and head. He was unhurried, he had no
wish to visit Kaneloon, he resented the interruption to his life with Eloarde which he thought he had
earned. Also he, too, had a superstitious dread of the mysterious castle, which was said to be inhabited
only by one human occu-pant-the Dark Lady, a sorceress without mercy who commanded a legion of
demons and other Chaos crea-tures.
He regarded the cliffs at midday and regarded the path leading upward with a mixture of wariness and
relief. He had expected to have to scale the cliffs. He was not one, however, to take a difficult route
where an easy one presented itself, so he looped a cord around his sword and slung it over his back, since
it was too long and cumbersome to carry at his side. Then, still in bad humour, he began to climb the
twisting path.
The lichen-covered rocks were evidently ancient, contrary to the speculations of certain philosophers
who asked why Kaneloon had only been heard of a few generations since. Malador believed in the general
answer to this question-that explorers had never ventured this far until fairly recently. He glanced
back down the path and saw the tops of the trees below him, their foliage moving slightly in the breeze.
The tower in which he'd spent the night was just visible in the distance and, beyond that, he knew, there
was no civilisation, no outpost of Man for many days' journey North, East, or West-can Chaos lay to the
South? He had never been so close to the edge of the world before and wondered how the sight of
unformed matter would affect his brain. At length he clambered to the top of the cliff and stood, arms
akimbo, staring up at Castle Kaneloon which soared a mile away, its highest towers hidden in the clouds,
its immense walls rooted on the rock and stretching away, limited on both sides only by the edge of the
cliff. And, on the other side of the cliff, Malador watched the churning, leaping Chaos-substance,
predominantly grey, blue, brown, and yellow at this moment, though its colours changed constantly,
spew like the sea-spray a few feet from the castle.
He became filled with a feeling of such indescrib-able profundity that he could only remain in this
position for a long while, completely overwhelmed by a sense of his own insignificance. It came to him,
eventually, that if anyone did dwell in the Castle Kaneloon, then they must have a robust mind or else
must be insane, and then he sighed and strode on towards his goal, noting that the ground was per-fectly
flat, without blemish, green, obsidian, and re-flecting imperfectly the dancing Chaos-stuff from which he
averted his eyes as much as he could. Kaneloon had many entrances, all dark and unwel-coming, and
had they all not been of regular size and shape they might have been so many cave-mouths.
Malador paused before choosing which to take, and then walked with outward purposefulness towards
one. He went into blackness which appeared to stretch away forever. It was cold; it was empty and he
was alone.
He was soon lost. His footsteps made no echo, which was unexpected; then the blackness began to give
way to a series of angular outlines, like the walls of a twisting corridor-walls which did not reach the
unsensed roof, but ended several yards above his head: It was a labyrinth, a maze. He paused and looked
back and saw with horror that the maze wound off in many directions, though he was sure he had
followed a straight path from the outside.
For an instant, his mind became diffused and madness threatened to engulf him, but he battened it down,
unslung his sword, shivering. Which way? He pressed on, unable to tell, now, whether he went forward
or backward.
The madness lurking in the depths of his brain filtered out and became fear and, immediately fol-lowing
the sensation of fear, came the shapes. Swift-moving shapes, darting from several different direc-tions,
gibbering, fiendish, utterly horrible. One of these creatures kept at him and he struck at it with his blade.
It fled, but seemed unwounded. Another came and another and he forgot his panic as he smote around
him, driving them back until all had fled. He paused and leaned, panting, on his sword. Then, as he
stared around him, the fear be-gan to flood back into him and more creatures ap-peared-creatures with
wide, blazing eyes and clutching talons, creatures with malevolent faces, mocking him, creatures with
half-familiar faces, some recognisable as those of old friends and rela-tives, yet twisted into horrific
parodies. He screamed and ran at them, whirling his huge sword, slashing, hacking at them, rushing past
one group to turn a bend in the labyrinth and encounter another. Malicious laughter coursed through the
twisting corridors, following him and preceding him as he ran. He stumbled and fell against a wall. At
first the wall seemed of solid stone, then, slowly it became soft and he sank through it, his body lying
half in one corridor, half in another. He hauled himself through, still on hands and knees, looked up and
saw Eloarde, but an Eloarde whose face grew old as he watched.
"I am mad," he thought. "Is this reality or fantasy- or both?"
He reached out a hand, "Eloarde"
She vanished but was replaced by a crowding horde of demons. He raised himself to his feet and flailed
around him with his blade, but they skipped outside his range and he roared at them as he ad-vanced.
Momentarily, while he thus exerted himself, the fear left him again and, with the disappearance of the
fear, so the visions vanished until he realised that the fear preceded the manifestations and he tried to
control it.
He almost succeeded, forcing himself to relax, but it welled up again and the creatures bubbled out of the
walls, their shrill voices full of malicious mirth. This time he did not attack them with his sword, but
stood his ground as calmly as he could and concentrated upon his own mental condition. As he did so,
the creatures began to fade away and then the walls of the labyrinth dissolved and it seemed to him that
he stood in a peaceful valley, calm and idyl-lic. Yet, hovering close to his consciousness, he seemed to
see the walls of the labyrinth faintly out-lined, and disgusting shapes moving here and there along the
many passages.
He realised that the vision of the valley was as much an illusion as the labyrinth and, with this conclusion,
both valley and labyrinth faded and he stood in the enormous hall of a castle which could only
be Kaneloon.
The hall was unoccupied though well-furnished, and he could not see the source of the light, which was
bright and even. He strode towards a table, on which were heaped scrolls, and his feet made a satis-fying
echo. Several great metal-studded doors led off from the hall, but for the moment he did not investi-gate
them, intent on studying the scrolls and seeing if they could help him unravel Kaneloon's mystery. He
propped his sword against the table and took up the first scroll.
It was a beautiful thing of red vellum, but the black letters upon it meant nothing to him and he was
astounded for, though dialects varied from place to place, there was only one language in all the lands of
the Earth. Another scroll bore different symbols still, and a third he unrolled carried a series of highly
stylised pictures which were repeated here and there so that he guessed they formed some kind of
alphabet. Disgusted, he flung the scroll down, picked up his sword, drew an immense breath, and 
shouted:
'Who dwells here? Let them know that Aubec, Earl of Malador, Champion of Klant and Conqueror of
the South claims this castle in the name of Queen Eloarde, Empress of all the Southlands In shouting
these familiar words, he felt somewhat more comfortable, but he received no reply. He lifted his casque a
trifle and scratched his neck. Then he picked up his sword, balanced it over his shoulder, and made for
the largest door. Before he reached it, it sprang open and a huge, manlike thing with hands like
grappling irons grinned at him.
He took a pace backward and then another until, seeing that the thing did not advance, stood his ground
observing it.
It was a foot or so taller than he, with oval, multi-faceted eyes that, by their nature, seemed blank. Its
face was angular and had a grey, metallic sheen. Most of its body was comprised of burnished metal,
jointed in the manner of armour. Upon its head was a tight-fitting hood, studded with brass. It had about
it an air of tremendous and insensate power, though it did not move.
A golem Malador exclaimed for it seemed to him that he remembered such man-made creatures from
legends. 'What sorcery created you' The golem did not reply but its hands-which were in reality
comprised of four spikes of metal apiece-began slowly to flex themselves; and still the golem grinned.
This thing, Malador knew, did not have the same amorphous quality of his earlier visions. This was
solid, this was real and strong, and even Malador's manly strength, however much he exerted it, could
not defeat such a creature. Yet neither could he turn away.
With a scream of metal joints, the golem entered the hall and stretched its burnished hands towards the
earl.
Malador could attack or flee, and fleeing would be senseless. He attacked.
His great sword clasped in both hands, he swung it sideways at the golem's torso, which seemed to be its
weakest point. The golem lowered an arm and the sword shuddered against metal with a mighty clang
that set the whole of Malador's body quaking. He stumbled backward. Remorselessly, the golem
followed him.
Malador looked back and searched the hall in the hope of finding a weapon more powerful than his
sword, but saw only shields of an ornamental kind upon the wall to his right. He turned and ran to the
wall, wrenching one of the shields from its place and slipping it on to his arm. It was an oblong thing,
very light, and comprising several layers of cross-grained wood. It was inadequate, but it made him feel
a trifle better as he whirled again to face the go-lem.
The golem advanced, and Malador thought he noticed something familiar about it, just as the demons of
the labyrinth had seemed familiar, but the impression was only vague. Kaneloon's weird sor-cery was
affecting his mind, he decided. The creature raised the spikes on its right arm and aimed a swift blow at
Malador's head. He avoided it, putting Up his sword as protection. The spikes clashed against the sword
and then the left arm pistoned forward, driving at Malador's stomach. The shield stopped his blow,
though the spikes pierced it deeply. He yanked the buckler off the spikes, slashing at the golem's legjoints
as he did so. Still staring into the middle-distance, with ap-parently no real interest in Malador, the
golem ad-vanced like a blind man as the earl turned and leapt on to the table, scattering the scrolls. Now
he brought his huge sword down upon the golem's skull, and the brass studs sparked and the hood and
head beneath it was dented. The golem staggered and then grasped the table, heaving it off the floor so
that Malador was forced to leap to the ground. This time he made for the door and tugged at its latchring,
but the door would not open.
His sword was chipped and blunted. He put his back to the door as the golem reached him and brought
its metal hand down on the top edge of the shield. The shield shattered and a dreadful pain shot up
Malador's arm. He lunged at the golem, but he was unused to handling the big sword in this manner and
the stroke was clumsy.
Malador knew that he was doomed. Force and fighting skill were not enough against the golem's insensate
strength. At the golem's next blow he swung aside, but was caught by one of its spike-fingers 
which ripped through his armour and drew blood, though at that moment he felt no pain. He scrambled
up, shaking away the grip and frag-ments of wood which remained of the shield, grasp-ing his sword
firmly.
"The soulless demon has no weak spot," he thought, "and since it has no true intelligence, it can-not be
appealed to. What would a golem fear?" The answer was simple. The golem would only fear something
as strong or stronger than itself. He must use cunning.
He ran for the upturned table with the golem after him, leaped over the table and wheeled as the golem
stumbled but did not, as he'd hoped, fall. How-ever, the golem was slowed by its encounter, and Au-bec
took advantage of this to rush for the door through which the golem had entered. It opened. He was in a
twisting corridor, darkly shadowed, not unlike the labyrinth he had first found in Kaneloon. The door
closed, but he could find nothing to bar it with. He ran up the corridor as the golem tore the door open
and came lumbering swiftly after him. The corridor writhed about in all directions, and, though he could
not always see the golem, he could hear it and had the sickening fear that he would turn a corner at some
stage and run straight into it. He did not-but he came to a door and, upon open-ing it and passing
through it, found himself again in the hall of Castle Kaneloon.
He almost welcomed this familiar sight as he heard the golem, its metal parts screeching, continue to
come after him. He needed another shield, but the part of the hall in which he now found himself had no
wall-shields-only a large, round mirror of bright, clear-polished metal. It would be too heavy to be much
use, but he seized it, tugging it from its hook. It fell with a clang and he hauled it up, drag-ging it with
him as he stumbled away from the go lem which had emerged into the room once more. Using the
chains by which the mirror had hung, he gripped it before him and, as the golem's speed increased and
the monster rushed upon him, he raised this makeshift shield.
The golem shrieked.
Malador was astounded. The monster stopped dead and cowered away from the mirror. Malador pushed
it towards the golem and the thing turned its back and fled, with a metallic howl, through the door it had
entered by.
Relieved and puzzled, Malador sat down on the floor and studied the mirror. There was Certainly
nothing magical about it, though its quality was good. He grinned and said aloud:
'The creature's afraid of something. It is afraid of itself' He threw back his head and laughed loudly in his
relief. Then he frowned. 'Now to find the sorcerers who created him and take vengeance on them' He
pushed himself to his feet, twisted the chains of the mirror more securely about his arm and went to another
door, concerned lest the golem complete its cir-cuit of the maze and return through the door. This
door would not budge, so he lifted his sword and hacked at the latch for a few moments until it gave. He
strode into a well-lit passage with what appeared to be another room at its far end-the door open. A
musky scent came to his nostrils as he progressed along the passage-the scent that reminded him of
Eloarde and the comforts of Klant.
When he reached the circular chamber, he saw that it was a bedroom-a woman's bedroom full of the
perfume he had smelled in the passage. He con-trolled the direction his mind took, thought of loy-alty
and Klant, and went to another door which led off from the room. He lugged it open and discovered a
stone staircase winding upward. This he mounted, passing windows that seemed glazed with emerald or
ruby, beyond which shadow-shapes flickered so that he knew he was on the side of the castle
overlooking Chaos.
The staircase seemed to lead up into a tower, and when he finally reached the small door at its top he was
feeling out of breath and paused before enter-ing. Then he pushed the door open and went in. A huge
window was set in one wall, a window of clear glass through which he could see the ominous stuff of
Chaos leaping. A woman stood by this win-dow as if awaiting him.
'You are indeed a champion, Earl Aubec,' said she with a smile that might have been ironic. 'How do
you know my name?'
'No sorcery gave it me, Earl of Malador-you shouted it loudly enough when you first saw the hall in its 
true shape.'
'Was not that, then, sorcery,' he said ungraciously, 'the labyrinth, the demons-even the valley? Was not
the golem made by sorcery? Is not this whole cursed castle of a sorcerous nature?'
She shrugged. 'Gall it so if you'd rather not have the truth. Sorcery, in your mind at least, is a crude thing
which only hints at the true powers existing in the universe.'
He did not reply, being somewhat impatient of such statements. He had learned, by observing the
philosophers of Klant, that mysterious words often disguised commonplace things and ideas. Instead, he
looked at her sulkily and over-frankly. She was fair, with green-blue eyes and a light com-plexion. Her
long robe was of a similar colour to her eyes. She was, in a secret sort of way, very beautiful as the
heroes who had earlier won over the dangers of Kaneloon. And then, she thought, she knew what to say.
'Think, Earl Aubec,' she whispered. 'Think-new lands for your queen's Empire!'
He frowned.
'Why not extend the Empire's boundaries farther?'
"she continued. 'Why not make new territories?' She watched him anxiously as he took off his helm and
scratched his heavy, bald head. 'You have made a point at last,' he said dubiously.
'Think of the honours you would receive in Klant if you succeeded in winning not merely Kaneloon- but
that which lies beyond!'
Now he rubbed is chin. 'Aye,' he said, 'Aye . .:
His great brows frowned deeply.
'New plains, new mountains, new seas-new popu-lations, even-whole cities full of people fresh-sprung
and yet with the memory of generations of ancestors behind them! All this can be done by you, Earl of
Malador-for Queen Eloarde and Lormyr!' He smiled faintly, his imagination fired at last. 'Aye! If I can
defeat such dangers here-then I can do the same out there! It will be the greatest adven-ture in history!
My name will become a legendMalador,
Master of Chaos!'
She gave him a tender look, though she had half-cheated him.
He swung his sword up on to his shoulder,. 'I'll try this, lady.'
She and he stood together at the window, watching the Chaos-stuff whispering and rolling for eternity
before them. To her it had never been wholly famil-lar, for it changed all the time. Now its tossing colours
were predominantly red and black. Tendrils of mauve and orange spiralled out of this and writhed
away.
Weird shapes flitted about in it, their outlines never clear, never quite recognisable. He said to her: 'The
Lords of Chaos rule this ter-ritory. What will they have to say?' 'They can say nothing, do little. Even
they have to obey the Law of the Cosmic Balance which ordains that if man can stand against Chaos,
then it shall be his to order and make Lawful. Thus the Earth grows, slowly.'
'How do I enter it?"
She took the opportunity to grasp his heavily muscled arm and point through the window. 'See- there-a
causeway leads down from this tower to the cliff.' She glanced at him sharply. 'Do you see it?' 'Ah-yes-I
had not, but now I do. Yes, a cause-way.'
Standing behind him, she smiled a little to herself.
'I will remove the barrier,' she said. He straightened his helm on his head. 'For Klant and Eloarde and
only those do I embark upon this adventure.'
She moved towards the wall and raised the win-dow. He did not look at her as he strode down the
causeway into the multicoloured mist. As she watched him disappear, she smiled to her-self. How easy
it was to beguile the strongest man by pretending to go his way! He might add lands to his Empire, but
he might find their populations un-willing to accept Eloarde as their Empress. In fact, if Aubec did his
work well, then he would be creating more of a threat to Klant than ever Kaneloon had been.
Yet she admired him, she was attracted to him, perhaps, because he was not so accessible, a little more
than she had been to that earlier hero who had claimed Aubec's own land from Chaos barely two 
hundred years before. Oh, he had been a man! But he, like most before him, had needed no other persuasion
than the promise of her body. Earl Aubec's weakness had lain in his strength, she thought. By
now he had vanished into the heaving mists.
She felt a trifle sad that this time the execution of the task given her by the Lords of Law had not brought
her the usual pleasure.
Yes perhaps, she thought, she felt a more subtle pleasure in his steadfastness and the means she had used
to convince him.
For centuries had the Lords of Law entrusted her with Kaneloon and its secrets. But the progress was
slow, for there were few heroes who could survive Kaneloon's dangers-few who could defeat selfcreated
perils.
Yet, she decided with a slight smile on her lips, the task had its various rewards. She moved into an-other
chamber to prepare for the transition of the castle to the new edge of the world. Thus were the seeds
sewn of the Age of the Young Kingdoms, the Age of Men, which was to produce the downfall of
Melnibone.
Book One
THE DREAMING CITY
Which tells how Elric came back to Imrryr, what he did there, and how, at last, his weird fell upon him . .
.
ONE
"What's the hour?' The black-bearded man wrenched off his gilded helmet and flung it from him,
careless of where it fell. He drew off his leathern gauntlets and moved closer to the roaring fire, letting
the heat soak into his frozen bones. 'Midnight is long past,' growled one of the other armoured men who
gathered around the blaze. 'Are you still sure he'll come?'
'It's said that he's a man of his word, if that com-forts you.'
It was a tall, pale-faced youth who spoke. His thin lips formed the words and spat them out mali-ciously.
He grinned a Wolf-grin and stared the new arrival in the eyes, mocking him.
The newcomer turned away with a shrug. 'That's so-for all your irony, Yaris. He'll come.' He spoke as a
man does when he wishes to reassure himself. There were six men, now, around the fire. The sixth was
Smiorgan-Count Smiorgan Baldhead of the Purple Towns. He was a short, stocky man of fifty years with
a scarred face partially covered with a thick, black growth of hair. His eyes smouldered morosely and his
lumpy fingers plucked nervously at his-rich-hilted longsword. His pate was hairless, giv-ing him his
name, and over his ornate, gilded ar-mour hung a loose woollen cloak, dyed purple. Smiorgan said
thickly, 'He has no love for his cousin. He has become bitter. Yyrkoon sits on the Ruby Throne in his
place and has proclaimed him an outlaw and a traitor. Elric needs us if he would take his throne and his
bride back. We can trust him.' 'You're full of trust tonight, Count,' Yaris smiled thinly, 'a rare thing to
find in these troubled times. I say this-' He paused and took a long breath, stating at his comrades,
summing them up. His gaze flicked from lean-faced Dharmit of Jharkor to Fadan of Lor-myr who pursed
his podgy lips and looked into the fire.
, 'Speak up, Yaris,' petulantly urged the patrician-featured Vilmirian, Naclon. 'Let's hear what you have
to say, lad, if it's worth hearing.' Yaris looked towards Jiku the dandy, who yawned impolitely and
scratched his long nose. 'Well!' Smiorgan was impatient. 'What d'you say, Yaris?'
'I say that we should start now and' waste no more time waiting on Elric's pleasure! He's laughing at us in
some tavern a hundred miles from here-or else plotting with the Dragon Princes to trap us. For years we
have planned this raid. We have little time in which to strike-our fleet is too big, too notice-able. Even if
Elric has not betrayed us, then spies will soon be running eastwards to warn the Dragons that there is a 
fleet massed against them. We stand to win a fantastic fortune-to vanquish the greatest merchant city in
the world-to reap immeasurable riches-or horrible death at the hands of the Dragon Princes, if we wait
overlong. Let's bide our time no more and set sail before our prize hears of our plan and brings up
reinforcements!'
'You always were too ready to mistrust a man, Yaris.' King Naclon of Vilmir spoke slowly, Care-fullydistastefully
eyeing the taut-featured youth. 'We could not reach Imrryr without Elric's knowledge of the
maze-channels which lead to its secret ports. If Elric will not join us-then our en-deavour will be fruitlesshopeless.
We need him. We must wait for him-or else give up our plans and return to our homelands.'
'At least I'm willing to take a risk,' yelled Yaris, anger lancing from his slanting eyes. 'You're getting oldall
of you. Treasures are not won by care and forethought but by swift slaying and reckless attack.' 'Fool!'
Dharmit's voice rumbled around the fire-flooded hall. He laughed wearily. 'I spoke thus in my youth-and
lost a fine fleet soon after. Cunning and Elric's knowledge will win us Imrryr-that and the mightiest fleet
to sail the Sighing Sea since Melnibone's banners fluttered over all the nations of the Earth. Here we arethe
most powerful Sea Lords in the world, masters, every one of us, of more than a hundred swift
vessels. Our names are feared and famous-our fleets ravage the coasts of a score of lesser nations. We
hold power!' He clenched his great fist and shook it in Yaris' face. His tone became more level and he
smiled viciously, glaring at the youth and choosing his words with precision. 'But all this is worthlessmeaningless-without
the power which Elric has. That is the power of knowledge-of sorcery, if I must use
the cursed word. His fathers knew of the maze which guards Imrryr from sea-attack. And his fathers
passed that secret on to him. Imrryr, the Dreaming City, dreams in peace-and will continue to do so
unless we have a guide to help us steer a course through the treacher-ous waterways which lead to her
harbours. We need Elric-we know it, and he knows it. That's the truth!' 'Such confidence, gentlemen, is
warming to the heart.' There was irony in the heavy voice which came from the entrance to the hall. The
heads of the six Sea Lords jerked towards the doorway. Yaris' confidence fled from him as he met the
eyes of Elric of Melnibon. They were old eyes in a fine featured, youthful face. Crimson eyes which
stared into eternity. Yaris shuddered, turned his back on Elric, preferring to look into the bright glare of
the fire.
Elric smiled warmly as Count Smiorgan gripped his shoulder. There was a certain friendship be-tween
the two. He nodded condescendingly to the other four and walked with lithe grace towards the fire. Yaris
stood aside and let him pass. Elric was tall, broad-shouldered and slim-hipped. He wore his long hair
bunched and pinned at the nape of his neck and, for an obscure reason, affected the dress of a Southern
barbarian. He had long, knee-length boots of soft doe-leather, a breastplate of strangely wrought silver, a
jerkin of chequered blue and white linen, britches of scarlet wool and a cloak of rustling green velvet. At
his hip rested his runesword of black iron- the feared Stormbringer, forged by ancient and alien sorcery.
His bizarre dress was tasteless and gaudy, and did not match his sensitive face and long-fingered, almost
delicate hands, yet he flaunted it since it emphasised the fact that he did not belong in any company-that
he was an outsider and an outcast. But, in reality, he had little need to wear such outlandish gear-for his
eyes and skin were enough to mark him. Elric, Last Lord of Melniborne, was a pure albino who drew
his power from a secret and terrible source.
Smiorgan sighed. 'Well, Elric, when do we raid Imrryr?'
Elric shrugged. 'As soon as you like; I care not.
Give me a little time in which to do certain things.' 'Tomorrow? Shall we sail tomorrow?' Yaris said
hesitantly, conscious of the strange power dormant in the man he had earlier accused of treachery. Elric
smiled, dismissing the youth's statement. 'Three days' time,' he said. 'Three-or more., 'Three days! But
Imrryr will be warned of our presence by then!' Fat, cautious Fadan spoke. I'll see that your fleet's not
found,' Elric promised.
'I have to go to Imrryr first-and return.' 'You won't do the journey in three days-the fast-est ship could not
make it.' Smiorgan gaped. I'll be in the Dreaming City in less than a day,' Elric said softly, with finality.
Smiorgan shrugged. 'If you say so, I'll believe it- but why this necessity to visit the city ahead of the 
raid?'
'I have my own compunctions, Count Smiorgan. But worry not, I shan't betray you. I'll lead the raid
myself, be sure of that.' His dead-white face was lighted eerily by the fire and his red eyes smoul-dered.
One lean hand firmly gripped the hilt of his runesword and he appeared to breathe more heavily. 'Imrryr
fell, in spirit, five hundred years ago-she will fall completely soon-for ever! I have a little debt to settle.
This is my only reason for aiding you. As you know I have made only a few conditions- that you raze
the city to the ground and a certain man and woman are not harmed. I refer to my cousin Yyrkoon and
his sister Cymoril...' Yaris' thin lips felt uncomfortably dry. Much of his blustering manner resulted from
the early death of his father. The old sea-king had died-leaving young Yaris as the new ruler of his lands
and his fleets. Yaris was not at all certain that he was capable of commanding such a vast kingdom-and
tried to appear more confident than he actually felt. Now he said: 'How shall we hide the fleet, Lord
Elric?' The Melnibonean acknowledged the question. I'll hide it for you,' he promised. "I go now to do
this- but make sure all your men are off the ships first- will you see to it, Smiorgan?'
'Aye,' rumbled the stocky count.
He and Elric departed from the hall together, leaving five men behind; five men who sensed an air of icy
doom hanging about the overheated hall. 'How could he hide such a mighty fleet when we, who know
this fjord better than any, could find nowhere?' Dharmit of Jharkor said bewilderedly. None answered
him.
They waited, tensed and nervous, while the fire flickered and died untended. Eventually Smiorgan
returned, stamping noisily on the boarded floor. There was a haunted haze of fear surrounding him; an
almost tangible aura, and he was shivering, terri-bly. Tremendous, racking undulations swept up his
body and his breath came short.
'Well? Did Elrlc hide the fleet-all at once? What did he do?' Dharmit spoke impatiently, choosing not to
heed Smiorgan's ominous condition. 'He has hidden it.' That was all Smiorgan said, and his voice was
thin, like that of a sick man, weak from fever.
Yaris went to the entrance and tried to stare be-yond the fjord slopes where many campfires burned, tried
to make out the outlines of ships' masts and rigging, but he could see nothing.
'The night mist's too thick,' he murmured, 'I can't tell whether our ships are anchored in the fiord or not.'
Then he gasped involuntarily as a white face loomed out of the clinging fog. 'Greetings, Lord E1-ric,' he
stuttered, noting the sweat on the Melni-bonean's strained features.
Elric staggered past him, into the hall. 'Wine,' he mumbled, 'I've done what's needed and it's cost me
hard.'
Dharmit fetched a jug of strong Cadsandrian wine and with a shaking hand poured some into a carved
wooden goblet. Wordlessly he passed the cup to Elric who quickly drained it. 'Now I will sleep,' he said,
stretching himself into a chair and wrapping his green cloak around him. He dosed his disconcerting
crimson eyes and fell into a slumber born of utter weariness.
Fadan scurried to the door, closed it and pulled the heavy iron bar down.
None of the six slept much that night and, in the morning, the door was unbarred and Elric was miss-ing
from the chair. When they went outside, the mist was so heavy that they soon lost sight of one an-other,
though scarcely two feet separated any of them.
Elric stood with his legs astraddle on the shingle of the narrow beach. He looked back at the entrance to
the fjord and saw, with satisfaction, that the mist was still thickening, though it lay only over the fjord
itself, hiding the mighty fleet. Elsewhere, the weather was clear and overhead a pale winter sun shone
sharply on the black rocks of the rugged cliffs which dominated the coastline. Ahead of him the sea rose
and fell monotonously, like the chest of a sleep-ing water-giant, grey and pure, glinting in the cold
sunlight. Elric fingered the raised runes on the hilt of his black broadsword and a steady north wind blew
into the voluminous folds of his dark green cloak, swirling it around his tall, lean frame. The albino felt
fitter than he had done on the pre-vions night when he had expended all his strength in conjuring the
mist. He was well-versed in the art of nature-wizardry, but he did not have the reserves of power which 
the Sorcerer Emperors of Melnibone had possessed when they had ruled the world. His ancestors had
passed their knowledge down to him-but not their mystic vitality and many of the spells and secrets that
he had were unusable, since he did not have the reservoir of strength, either of soul or of body, to work
them. But for all that, Elric knew of only one other man who matched his knowledge-his cousin
Yyrkoon. His hand gripped the hilt tighter as he thought of the cousin who had twice betrayed his trust,
and he forced himself to concentrate on his present task-the speaking of spells to aid him on his voyage
to the Isle of the Dragon Masters whose only city, Imrryr the Beauti-ful, was the object of the Sea Lords'
massing. Drawn up on the beach, a tiny sailing-boat lay-El-ric's own small ship, sturdy and far stronger,
far older,-than it appeared. The brooding sea flung surf around its timbers as the tide withdrew, and Elric
re-alised that he had little time in which to work his helpful sorcery.
His body tensed and he blanked his conscious mind, summoning secrets from the dark depths of his soul.
Swaying, his eyes staring unseeingly, his arms jerking out ahead of him and making Unholy signs in the
air, he began to speak in a sibilant mon-otone. Slowly the pitch of his voice rose, resembling the scarcely
heard shriek of a distant gale as it comes closer-then, quite suddenly, the voice rose higher until it was
howling wildly to the skies and the air began to tremble and quiver. Shadow-shapes began slowly to
form and they were never still but darted around Elric's body as, stiff-legged, he started for-,.ward
towards his boat.
His voice was inhuman as it howled insistently, summoning the wind elementals-the sylphs of the
breeze; the sharnahs, makers of gales, the h'Haar. shanns, builders of whirlwinds-hazy and formless,
they eddied around him as he summoned their aid with the Mien words of his forefathers who had, ages
before, made unthinkable pacts with the elemental., in order to procure their services. Still stiff-limbed,
Elric entered the boat and, like an automaton, his fingers ran up the sail and set it. Then a great wave
erupted out of the placid sea, rising higher and higher until it towered over the vessel. With a surging
crash, the water smashed down on the boat, lifted it and bore it out to sea. Sitting blank-eyed in the
stem, Elric still crooned his hideous song of sorcery as the spirits of the air plucked at the sail and sent
the boat flying over the water faster than any mortal ship could speed. And all the while, the deafening,
unholy shriek of the released elementals filled the air about the boat as the shore vanished and open sea
was all that was visible.
TWO
So it was, with wind-demons for shipmates, that Elric, last Prince of the Royal line of Melnibone, returned
to the last city still ruled by his own race-the last city and the final remnant of Melnibonean architecture.
The cloudy pink and subtle yellow tints of her nearer towers came into sight within a few
hours of Elric's leaving the fjord and just off.shore of the Isle of the Dragon Masters the elementals left
the boat and fled back to their secret haunts among the peaks of the highest mountains in the world. El
ric awoke, then, from his trance, and regarded with fresh wonder the beauty of his own city's delicate
towers which were visible even so far away, guarded still by the formidable sea-wall with its great gate,
the five-doored maze and the twisting, high-walled channels, of which only one led to the inner harbour
of Imrryr.
Elric knew that he dare not risk entering the hat-bour by the maze, though he knew the route per-fectly.
He decided, instead, to land the boat further up the coast in a small inlet of which he had knowledge.
With sure, capable hands, he guided the little craft towards the hidden inlet which was ob-scured by a
growth-of shrubs loaded with ghastly blue berries of a type decidedly poisonous to men since their juice
first turned one blind and then slowly mad. This berry, the nodoil, grew only on Imrryr as did other rare
and deadly plants. Light, low-hanging cloud wisps streamed slowly across the sun-painted sky, like fine
cobwebs caught by a sudden breeze. All the world seemed blue and gold and green and white, and Elric,
pulling his boat up on the beach, breathed the clean, sharp air of winter and savoured the scent of
decaying leaves and rotting undergrowth. Somewhere a bitch-fox barked her pleasure to her mate and 
Elric regretted the fact that his depleted race no longer appreciated natural beauty, preferring to stay
close to their city and spend many of their days in drugged slumber. It was not the city which dreamed,
but its overcivilised in. habitants. Elric, smelling the rich, clean winter. scents, was wholly glad that he
had his birthright and did not rule the city as he had been born to do. Instead, Yyrkoon, his cousin,
sprawled on the Ruby Throne of Imrryr the Beautiful and hated El-tic because he knew that the albino,
for all his dis-gust with crowns and rulership, was still the rightful King of the Dragon Isle and that he,
Yyrkoon, was an 'usurper, not elected by Elric to the throne, as Melnibonean tradition demanded.
But Elric had better reasons for hating his cousin. For those reasons the ancient capital would fall in all
its magnificent splendour and the last fragment of a glorious Empire would be obliterated as the pink, the
yellow, the purple and white towers crumbled-if Elric had his way and the Sea Lords were success-ful.
On foot, Elric strode inland, towards Imrryr, and as he covered the miles of soft turf, the sun cast an
ochre pall over the land and sank, giving way to a dark and moonless night, brooding and full of evil
portent.
At last he came to the city. It stood out in stark black silhouette, a city of fantastic magnificence, in
conception and in execution. It was the oldest city in the world, built by artists and conceived as a work
of art rather than a functional dwelling place, but Elric knew that squalor lurked in many narrow streets
and that the Lords of Imrryr left many of the towers empty and uninhabited rather than let the bastard
population of the city dwell therein. There were few Dragon Masters left; few who would claim Melnibonean
blood.
Built to follow the shape of the ground, the city had an organic appearance, with winding lanes spiralling
to the crest of the hill where stood the castle, tall and proud and many-spired, the final, crowning
masterpiece of the ancient, forgotten artist who had built it. But there was no life-sound ema-nating from
Imrryr the Beautiful, only a sense of sop-orific desolation. The city slept-and the Dragon Masters and
their ladies and their special slaves dreamed drug-induced dreams of grandeur and in-credible horror
while the rest of the population, or-dered by curfew, tossed on tawdry mattresses and tried not to dream
at all.
Elric, his hand ever near his sword-hilt, slipped through an unguarded gate in the city wall and be-gan to
walk cautiously through the unlighted streets, moving upwards, through the winding lanes, towards
Yyrkoon's great palace.
Wind sighed through the empty rooms of the Dragon towers and sometimes Elric would have to
withdraw into places where the shadows were deeper when he heard the tramp of feet and a group of
guards would pass, their duty being to see that the curfew was rigidly obeyed. Often he would hear wild
laughter echoing from one ;of the towers, still ablaze with bright torchlight which flung strange,
disturbing shadows on the walls; often, too, he would hear a chilling scream and a frenzied, idiot's yell as
some wretch of a slave died in obscene agony to please his master.
Elric was not appalled by the sounds and the dim sights. He appreciated them. He was still a
Melnibonean-their rightful leader if he chose to regain his powers of kinship-and though' he had an
obscure urge to wander and sample the less sophisticated pleasures of the outside world, ten thousand
years of a cruel, brilliant and malicious culture was behind him and the pulse of his ancestry beat
strongly in his deficient veins.
Elric knocked impatiently upon the heavy, black-wood door. He had reached the palace and now stood
by a small back entrance, glancing cautiously around him, for he knew that Yyrkoon had given the
guards orders to slay him if he entered lmrryr. A bolt squealed on the other side of the door and it
moved silently inwards. A thin, seamed face con-fronted Elric.
'Is it the king?' whispered the man, peering out into the night. He was a tall, extremely thin individ-ual
with long, gnarled limbs which shifted awk-wardly as he moved nearer, straining his beady eyes to get a
glimpse of Elric.
'It's Prince Elric,' the albino said. 'But you forget, Tanglebones, my friend, that a new king sits on the
Ruby Throne.'
Tanglebones shook his head and his sparse hair fell over his face. With a jerking movement he brushed it
back and stood aside for Elric to enter. 'The Dragon Isle has but one king-and his name is Elric,
whatever usurper would have it otherwise.' Elric ignored this statement, but he smiled thinly and waited
for the man to push the bolt back into place.
'She still sleeps, sire,' Tanglebones murmured as he climbed unlit stairs, Elric behind him. 'I guessed
that,' Elric said. 'I do not underestimate my good cousin's powers of sorcery.' Upwards, now, in silence,
the two men climbed until at last they reached a corridor which was aflare with dancing torchlight. The
marble walls reflected the flames and showed Elric, crouching with Tangle-bones behind a pillar, that
the room in which he was interested was guarded by a massive archer-a eu-nuch by the look of him-who
was alert and wakeful.
The man was hairless and fat, his blue-black gleaming armour tight on his flesh, but his fingers were
curled around the string of his short, ,bone bow and there was a slim arrow resting on the string. Elric
guessed that this man was one of the crack eunuch archers, a member of the Silent Guard, Imrryr's finest
company of warriors.
Tanglebones, who had taught the young Elric the arts of fencing and archery, had known of the guard's
presence and had prepared for it. Earlier he had placed a bow behind the pillar. Silently he picked it up
and, bending it against his knee, strung it. He fitted an arrow to the string, aimed it at the right eye of the
guard and let fly-just at the eunuch turned to face him. The shaft missed. It clattered against the man's
gorget and fell harmlessly to the reed-strewn stones of the floor.
So Elric acted swiftly, leaping forward, his rune-sword drawn and its alien power surging through him. It
howled in a searing arc of black steel and cut through the bone bow which the eunuch had hoped would
deflect it. The guard was panting and his thick lips were wet as he drew breath to yell. As he opened his
mouth, Elric saw what he had expected, the man was tongueless and was a mute. His own shortsword
came out and he just managed to parry Elric's next thrust. Sparks flew from the iron and Stormbringer bit
into the eunuch's finely edged blade, he staggered and fell back before the nigro-mantic sword which
appeared to be endowed with a life of its own. The clatter of metal echoed loudly up and down the short
corridor and Elric cursed the fate which had made the man turn at the crucial mo-ment. Grimly, swiftly,
he broke down the eunuch's clumsy guard.
The eunuch saw only a dim glimpse of his op-ponent behind the black, whirling blade which ap-peared
to be so light and which was twice the length of his own stabbing sword. He wondered, frenziedly, who
his attacker could be and he thought he recog-nised the face. Then a scarlet eruption obscured his vision,
he felt searing agony clutch at his face and then, philosophically, for eunuchs are necessarily given to a
certain fatalism, he realised that he was to die.
Elric stood over the eunuch's bloated body and tugged his sword from the corpse's skull, wiping the
mixture of blood and brains on his late opponent's cloak. Tanglebones had wisely vanished. Elric could
hear the clatter of sandalled feet rushing up the stairs. He pushed the door open and entered the room
which was lit by two small candles placed at ei-ther end of a wide, richly tapestried bed. He went to the
bed and looked down at the raven-haired girl who lay there.
Elric's mouth twitched and bright tears leapt into his strange red eyes. He was trembling as he turned
back to the door, sheathed his sword and pulled the bolts into place. He returned to the bedside and knelt
down beside the sleeping girl. Her features were as delicate and of a similar mould as Elric's own, but
she had an added, exquisite beauty. She was breathing shallowly, in a sleep induced not by natural
weariness but by her own brother's evil sor-cery.
Elric reached out and tenderly took one fine-fin-gered hand in his. He put it to his lips and kissed it.
'Cymoril,' he murmured, and an agony of longing throbbed in that name. 'Cymoril-wake up.' The girl did
not stir, her breathing remained shal-low and her eyes remained shut. Elric's white fea-tures twisted and
his red eyes blazed as he shook in terrible and passionate rage. He gripped the hand, so limp and
nerveless, like the hand of a corpse; gripped it until he had to stop himself for fear that he would crush
the delicate fingers. A shouting soldier began to beat at the door. Elric replaced the hand on the girl's 
firm breast and stood up. He glanced uncomprehendingly at the door.
A sharper, colder voice interrupted the soldier's yelling.
'What is happening-has someone tried to see my poor sleeping sister?'
'Yyrkoon, the black hellspawn,' said Elric to him-self.
Confused babblings from the soldier and Yyr-koon's voice raised as he shouted through the door.
'Whoever is in there-you will be destroyed a thou-sand times when you are caught. You cannot escape.
If my good sister is harmed in any way-then you will never die, I promise you that. But you will pray to
your Gods that you could!'
'Yyrkoon, you paltry rabble-you cannot threaten one who is your equal in the dark arts. It is I, E1-ricyour
rightful master. Return to your rabbit hole before I call down every evil power upon, above, and
under the Earth to blast you!'
Yyrkoon laughed hesitantly. 'So you have returned again to try to waken my sister. Any such attempt
will not only slay her-it will send her soul into the deepest hell-where you may join it, willingly!' By
Arnara's six breasts-you it will be who samples the thousand deaths before long.'
'Enough of this.' Yyrkoon raised his voice. 'Sol-diers-I command you to break this door down-and take
that traitor alive. Elric-there are two things you will never again have-my sister's love and the Ruby
Throne. Make what you can of the little time available to you, for soon you will be grovelling to me and
praying for release from your soul's agony!' Elric ignored Yyrkoon's threats and looked at the narrow
window to the room. It was just large enough for a man's body to pass through. He bent down and kissed
Cymoril upon the lips, then he went to the door and silently withdrew the bolts. There came a crash as a
soldier flung his weight against the door. It swung open, pitching the man forward to stumble and fall on
his face. Elric drew his sword, lifted it high and chopped at the warrior's neck. The head sprang from its
shoulders and Elric yelled loudly in a deep, rolling voice. 'Arioch! Arioch! I give you blood and soulsonly
aid me now! This man I give you, mighty King of Hell-aid your servant, Elric of Melnibone!' Three
soldiers entered the room in a bunch. Elric struck at one and sheared off half his face. The man screamed
horribly..
'Arioch, Lord of the Darks-I give you blood and souls. Aid me, evil one' In the far comer of the gloomy
room, a blacker mist began slowly, to form. But the soldiers pressed closer and Elric was hard put to
hold them back. He was screaming the name of Arioch, Lord of the Higher Hell, incessantly, almost
unconsciously as he was pressed back further by the weight of the war-riors' numbers. Behind them,
Yyrkoon mouthed in rage and frustration, urging his men, still, to take El-tic alive. This necessity gave
Elric some small ad-vantage-that and the runesword Stormbringer which was glowing with a strange
black luminousness and the shrill howling it gave out was grating into the ears of those who heard it.
Two more corpses now littered the carpeted floor of the chamber, their blood soaking into the fine fabric.
"Blood and souls [or my lord Arioch!" The dark mist heaved and began to take shape, Elric spared a look
towards the corner and shud-dered despite his inurement to hell-born horror. The warriors now had their
backs to the thing in the corner and Elric was by the window. The amor-phous mass that was a less than
pleasant manifesta-tion of Elric's fickle patron God, heaved again and Elric made out its intolerably alien
shape. Bile flooded into his mouth and as he drove the soldiers towards the thing which was sinuously
flooding for-ward he fought against madness.
Suddenly, the soldiers seemed' to sense that there was something behind them. They turned, four of
them, and each screamed insanely as the black hor-ror made one final rush to engulf them. Arioch
crouched over them, sucking out their souls. Then, slowly, their bones began to give and snap and still
shrieking bestially the men flopped like obnoxious invertebrates upon the floor: their spines broken, they
still lived. Elric turned away, thankful for once that Cymoril slept, and leapt to the window ledge. He
looked down and realised with despair that he was not going to escape by that route after all. Several
hundred feet lay between him and the ground. He rushed to the door where Yyrkoon, his eyes wide with
fear, was trying to drive Arioch back. Arioch was already fading.
Elric pushed past his cousin, spared a final glance for Cymoril, then ran the way he had come, his feet 
flipping on blood. Tanglebones met him at the head of the dark stairway.
'What has happened, King Elric-what's in there?' Elric seized Tanglebones by his lean shoulder and made
him descend the stairs. 'No time,' he panted, 'but we must hurry while Yyrkoon is still engaged with his
current problem. In five days' time Imrryr will experience a new phase in her history-perhaps the last. I
want you to make sure that Cymoril is safe. Is that dear?'
'Aye, Lord, but...'
They reached the door and Tanglebones shot the bolts and opened it.
'There is no time for me to say anything else. I must escape while I can. I will return in five days- with
companions. You will realise what I mean when that time comes. Take Cymoril to the Tower of
D'a'rputna-and await me there.'
Then Elric was gone, soft-footed, running into the night with the shrieks of the dying still ringing
through the blackness after him.
THREE
Elric stood unspeaking in the prow of Count Smior-gan's flagship. Since his return to the fjord and the
fleet's subsequent sailing for open sea, he had spoken only orders, and those in the tersest of terms. The
Sea Lords muttered that a great hate lay in him, that it festered his soul and made him a dangerous man
to have as comrade or enemy; and even Count Smior-gan avoided the moody albino.
The reaver prows struck eastward and the sea was black with light ships dancing on the bright water in
all directions; they looked like the shadow of some enormous sea-bird flung on the water. Nearly half a
thousand fighting ships stained the ocean-all of them of similar form, long and slim and built for speed
rather than battle, since they were for coast-raiding and trading. Sails were caught by the pale sun; bright
colours of fresh canvas-orange, blue, black, purple, red, yellow, light green or white. And every ship had
sixteen or more rowers-each rower a fighting man. The crews of the ships were also the warriors who
would attack Imrryr-there was no wastage of good man-power since the sea-nations were
underpopulated, losing hundreds of men each year in their regular raids.
In the centre of the great fleet, certain larger vessels sailed. These carried great catapults on their decks
and were to be used for storming the sea wall of Imrryr. Count Smiorgan and the other Lords looked at
their ships with pride, but Elric only stared ahead of him, never sleeping, rarely moving, his white face
lashed by salt spray and wind, his white hand tight upon his swordhilt. The reaver ships ploughed
steadily eastwards- forging towards the Dragon Isle and fantastic wealth-or hellish horror. Relentlessly,
doom-driven, they beat onwards, their oars splashing in unison, their sails bellying taut with a good
wind. Onwards they sailed, towards Imrryr the Beauti-ful, to rape and plunder the world's oldest city.
Two days after the fleet had set sail, the coastline of the Dragon Isle was sighted and the rattle of arms
replaced the sound of oars as the mighty fleet hove to and prepared to accomplish what sane men thought
impossible.
Orders were bellowed from ship to ship and the fleet began to mass into battle formation, then the oars
creaked in their grooves and ponderously, with sails now furled, the fleet moved forward again. It was a
clear day, cold and fresh, and there was a tense excitement about all the men, from Sea Lord to galley
hand, as they considered the immediate fu-ture and what it might bring. Serpent prows bent towards the
great stone wall which blocked off the first entrance to the harbour. It was nearly a hundred feet high and
towers were built upon it- more functional than the lace-like spires of the city which shimmered in the
distance, behind them. The ships of Imrryr were the only vessels allowed to pass through the great gate
in the centre of the wall and the route through the maze-the exact entrance even-was a well-kept secret
from outsiders. On the sea wall, which now loomed tall above the fleet, amazed guards scrambled
frantically to their posts. To them, threat of attack was well-nigh un-thinkable, yet here it was-a great
fleet, the greatest they had ever seen-come against Imrryr the Beauti-full They took to their posts, their
yellow cloaks and kilts rustling, their bronze armour rattling, but they moved with bewildered reluctance 
as if refusing to accept what they saw. And they went to their posts with desperate fatalism, knowing that
even if the ships never entered the maze itself, they would not be alive to witness the reavers' failure.
Dyvim Tarkan, Commander of the Wall, was a sensitive man who loved life and its pleasures. He was
highbrowed and handsome, with a thin wisp of beard and a tiny moustache. He looked well in the bronze
armour and high-plumed helmet; he did not want to die. He issued terse orders to his men and, with wellordered
precision, they obeyed him. He lis-tened with concern to the distant shouts from the ships and he
wondered what the first move of the reavers would be. He did not wait long for his an-swer.
A catapult on one of the leading vessels twanged throatily and its throwing arm rushed up, releasing a
great rock which sailed, with every appearance of leisurely grace, towards the wall. It fell short and
splashed into the sea which frothed against the stones of the wall.
Swallowing hard and trying to control the shake in his voice, Dyvim Tarkan ordered his own catapult to
discharge. With a thudding crash the release rope was cut and a retaliatory iron ball went hurtling
towards the enemy fleet. So tight-packed were the ships that the ball could not miss-it struck flail on the
deck of the flagship of Dharmit of Jharkor and crushed the timbers in. Within seconds, accompanied by
the cries of maimed and drowning men, the ship had sunk and Dharmit with it. Some of the crew were
taken aboard other vessels but the wounded were left to drown.
Another catapult sounded and this time a tower full of archers was squarely hit. Masonry erupted
outwards and those who still lived fell sickeningly to die in the foam-tipped sea lashing the wall. This
time, angered by the deaths of their comrades Imrryrian archers sent back a stream of slim arrow into the
enemy's midst. Reavers howled as red fletched shafts buried themselves thirstily in flesh But reavers
returned the arrows liberally and soot only a handful of men were left on the wall as fur ther catapult
rocks smashed into towers and men destroying their only war-machine and part of the wall besides.
Dyvim Tarkan still lived, though red blood stained his yellow tunic and an arrow shaft pro truded from
his left shoulder. He still lived when the first ram-ship moved intractably towards the great wooden gate
and smashed against it, weakening it. A second ship sailed in beside it and, between them, they stove in
the gate and glided through the entrance; the first non-Imrryrian ships ever to do such a thing. Perhaps it
was outraged horror that tradition had been broken which caused poor Dyvim Tarkan to lose his footing
at the edge of the wall and fall screaming down to break his neck on the deck of Count Smiorgan's
flagship as it sailed tri umphantly through the gate.
Now the ram-ships made way for Count Smior-gan's craft, for Elric had to lead the way through the
maze. Ahead of them loomed five tall entrances black gaping maws all alike in shape and size. Elric
pointed to the third from the left and with short strokes the oarsmen began to paddle the ship into the
dark mouth of the entrance. For some minutes, they sailed in darkness.
'Flares!' shouted Elric. 'Light the flares!' Torches had already been prepared and these were now lighted.
The men saw that they were in a vast tunnel hewn out of natural rock which twisted tortuously in all
directions.
'Keep close,' Elric ordered and his voice was mag-nified a score of times in the echoing cavern. Torchlight
blazed and Elric's Face was a mask of shadow and frisking light as the torches threw up long
tongues of flame to the bleak roof. Behind him, men could be heard muttering in awe and, as more craft
entered the maze and lit their own torches, Elric could see some torches waver as their bearers trembled
in superstitious fear. Elric felt some dis-comfort as he glanced through the flickering shadows and his
eyes, caught by torchflare, gleamed fever-bright.
With dreadful monotony, the oars splashed on-wards as the tunnel widened and several more cavemouths
came into sight. 'The middle entrance,' Elric ordered.' The steersman in the stern nodded and
guided the ship towards the entrance Elric had indi-cated. Apart from the muted murmur of some men
and the splash of oars, there was a grim and ominous silence in the towering cavern.
Elric stared down at the cold, dark water and shuddered.
Eventually they moved once again into bright sun-light and the men looked Upwards, marvelling at the
height of the great walls above them. Upon those walls squatted more yellow-clad, bronze-armoured 
archers and as Count Smiorgan's vessel led the way out of the black caverns, the torches still burning in
the cool winter air, arrows began to hurtle down into the narrow canyon, biting into throats and limbs.
'Faster!' howled Elric. 'Row faster-speed is our only weapon now!'
With frantic energy the oarsmen bent to their sweeps and the ships began to pick up speed even though
Imrryrian arrows took heavy toll of the reaver crewmen. Now the high-walled channel ran straight and
Elric saw the quays of Imrryr ahead of him.
"Faster? Faster? Our prize is in sight?" Then, suddenly, the ship broke past the wails and was in the calm
waters of the harbour, facing the warriors drawn up on the quay. The ship halted, waiting for
reinforcements to plunge out of the channel and join them. When twenty ships were through, Elric gave
the command to attack the quay and now Stormbringer howled from its scabbard. The flagship's port
side thudded against the quay as arrows rained down upon it. Shafts whistled all around Elric but,
miraculously, he was unscathed as he led a bunch of yelling rearers on to land. Imrryrian axe-men
bunched forward and confronted the reavers, but it was plain that they had little spirit for the fight-they
were too disconcerted by the course which events had taken.
Elric's black blade struck with frenzied force at the throat of the leading axe-man and sheared off his
head. Howling demoniacally now that it had again tasted blood, the sword began to writhe in Elric's
grasp, seeking fresh flesh in which to bite. There was a hard, grim smile on the albino's colourless lips
and his eyes were narrowed as he smack without discrim-ination at the warriors.
He planned to leave the fighting to those he had led to Imrryr, for he had other things to do-and quickly.
Behind the yellow-garbed soldiers, the tall towers of Imrryr rose, beautiful in their soft and scintillating
colours of coral pink and powdery blue, of gold and pale yellow, white and subtle green. One such tower
was Elric's objective-the tower of D'a'rputna where he had ordered Tanglebones to take Cymoril,
knowing that in the confusion this would be possible.
Elric hacked a blood-drenched path through those who attempted to halt him and men fell back,
screaming horribly as the runesword drank their souls.
Now Elric was past them, leaving them to the bright blades of the reavers who poured on to the
quayside, and was running up through the twisting streets, his sword slaying anyone who attempted to
stop him. Like a white-faced ghoul he was, his cloth-ing tattered and bloody, his armour chipped and
scratched, but he ran speedily over the cobble-stones of the twisting streets and came at last to the
slender tower of hazy blue and soft gold-the Tower of D'a'rputna. Its door was open, showing that
someone was inside, and Elric rushed through it and entered the large ground-floor chamber. No one
greeted him. 'Tanglebones!' he yelled, his voice roaring loudly even in his own ears. 'Tanglebones-are
you here?' He leapt up the stairs in great bounds, calling his servant's name. On the third floor he stopped
sud-denly, hearing a low groan from one of the rooms. 'Tanglebones-is that you?' Elric strode towards
the room, hearing a strangled gasping. He pushed open the door and his stomach seemed to twist within
him as he saw the old man lying upon the bare floor of the chamber, striving vainly to stop the flow of
blood which gouted from a great wound in his side. 'What's happened man-where's Cymoril?'
Tanglebones' old face twisted in pain and grief.
'She-I-I brought her here, master, as you ordered. But-' he coughed and blood dribbled down his
wizened chin, 'but-Prince Yyrkoon-he-he appre-hended me-must have followed us here. He-struck me
down and took Cymoril back with him-said she'd be-safe in the Tower of B'aal'nezbett. Mas-ter-I'm
sorry...'
'So you should be,' Elric retorted savagely. Then his tone softened. 'Do not worry, old friend-I'll avenge
you and myself. I can still reach Cymoril now I know where Yyrkoon has taken her. Thank you for
trying, Tanglebones-may your long journey down the last river be uneventful.'
He turned abruptly on his heel and left the cham-ber, running down the stairs and out into the street
again.
The Tower of B'aal'nezbett was the highest tower in the Royal Palace. Elric knew it well, for it was there
that his ancestors had studied their dark sor-ceries and conducted frightful experiments. He shuddered as 
he thought what Yyrkoon might be do-ing to his own sister.
The streets of the city seemed hushed and strangely deserted, but Elric had no time to ponder why this
should be so. Instead he dashed towards the palace, found the main gate unguarded and the main
entrance to the building deserted. This too was unique, but it constituted luck for Elric as he made his
way upwards, climbing familiar ways towards the topmost tower.
Finally, he reached a door of shimmering black crystal which had no bolt or handle to it. Frenziedly,
Elric struck at the crystal with his sorcerous blade but the crystal appeared only to flow and re-form. His
blows had no effect.
Elric racked his mind, seeking to remember the single alien word which would make the door open. He
dared not put himself in the trance which would have, in time, brought the word to his lips, instead he
had to dredge his subconscious and bring the word forth. It was dangerous but there was little else he
could do. His whole frame trembled as his face twisted and his brain began to shake. The word was
coming as his vocal chords jerked in his throat and his chest heaved.
He coughed the word out and his whole mind and body ached with the strain. Then he cried:
'I command thee-open!'
He knew that once the door opened, his cousin would be aware of his presence, but he had to risk it. The
crystal expanded, pulsating and seething, and then began to flow out. It flowed into nothingness, into
something beyond the physical universe, beyond time. Elric breathed thankfully and passed into the
Tower of B'aal'nezbett. But now an eerie fire, chill-ing and mind-shattering, was licking around Elric as
he struggled up the steps towards the central cham-ber. There was a strange music surrounding him,
uncanny music which throbbed and sobbed and pounded in his head.
Above him he saw a leering Yyrkoon, a black runesword also in his hand, the mate of the one in Elric's
own grasp.
'Hellspawn!' Elric said thickly, weakly, 'I see you have recovered Mournblade-well, test its powers
against its brother if you dare. I have come to destroy you, cousin.'
Stormbringer was giving forth a peculiar moaning sound which sighed over the shrieking, unearthly
music accompanying the licking, chilling fire. The runesword writhed in Elric's fist and he had difficulty
in controlling it. Summoning all his strength he plunged up the last few steps and aimed a wild
blow at Yyrkoon. Beyond the eerie fire bubbled yel-low-green lava, on all sides, above and beneath. The
two men .were surrounded only by the misty fire and the lava which lurked beyond it-they were outside
the Earth and facing one another for a final battle. The lava seethed and began to ooze inwards, dispersing
the fire.
The two blades met and a terrible shrieking roar went up. Elric felt his whole arm go numb and it tingled
sickeningly. Elric felt like a puppet. He was no longer his own master-the blade was deciding his actions
for him. The blade, with Elric behind it, roared past its brother sword and cut a deep wound in Yyrkoon's
left arm. He howled and his eyes widened in agony. Mournblade struck back at Stormbringer, catching
Elric in the very place he had wounded his cousin. He sobbed in pain, but continued to move upwards,
now wounding Yyrkoon in the right side with a blow strong enough to have killed any other man.
Yyrkoon laughed then- laughed like a gibbering demon from the foulest depths of Hell. His sanity had
broken at last and El-tic now had the advantage. But the great sorcery which his cousin had conjured was
still in evidence and Elric felt as if a giant had grasped him,-was crushing him as he pressed his
advantage, Yyrkoon's blood spouting from the wound and covering Elric, also. The lava was slowly
withdrawing and now Elric saw the entrance to the central chamber. Behind his cousin another form
moved. Elric gasped. Cymoril had awakened and, with horror on her face, was shrieking at him.
The sword still swung in a black arc, cutting down Yyrkoon's brother blade and breaking the usurper's
guard.
'Elric!' cried Cymoril desperately. 'Save me-save me now, else we are doomed for eternity.' Elric was
puzzled by the girl's words. He could not understand the sense of them. Savagely he drove Yyrkoon
upwards towards the chamber. 'Elric-put Stormbringer away. Sheath your sword or we shall part again.'
But even if he could have controlled the whistling blade, Elric would not have sheathed it. Hate dominated
his being and he would sheathe it in his cousin's evil heart before he put it aside. Cymoril was
weeping, now, pleading with him. But Elric could do nothing. The drooling, idiot thing which had been
Yyrkoon of Imrryr, turned at its sister's cries and stared leeringly at her. It cackled and reached out one
shaking: hand to seize the girl by her shoulder. She struggled to escape, but Yyrkoon still had his evil
strength. Taking ad-vantage of his opponent's distraction, Elric cut deep through his body, almost
severing the trunk from the waist.
And yet, incredibly, Yyrkoon remained alive, drawing his vitality from the blade which still clashed
against Elric's own rune-carved sword. With a final push he flung Cymoril forward and she died
screaming on the point of Stormbringer. Then Yyrkoon laughed one final caching shriek and his black
soul went howling down to hell. The tower resumed its former proportions, all fire and lava gone. Elric
was dazed-unable to marshal his thoughts. He looked down at the dead bodies of the brother and the
sister. He saw them, at first, only as corpses-a man's and a woman's.
Then dark truth dawned on his clearing brain and he moaned in grief, like an animal. He had slain the
girl he loved. The runesword fell from his grasp, stained by Cymoril's lifeblood, and clattered un-heeded
down the stairs. Sobbing now, Elric dropped beside the dead girl and lifted her in his arms. 'Cymoril,' he
moaned, his whole body throbbing.
'Cymoril-I have slain you.'
FOUR
Elric looked back at the roaring, crumbling, tum-bling, flame-spewing ruins of Imrryr and drove his
sweating oarsmen faster. The ship, sail still un-furled, bucked as a contrary current of wind caught it and
Elric was forced to cling to the ship's side lest he be tossed overboard. He looked back at Imrryr and felt
a tightness in his throat as he realised that he was truly rootless, now; a renegade and a woman-slayer,
though involuntarily the latter. He had lost the only woman he had loved in his blind lust for re-venge.
Now it was finished-everything was finished. He could envisage no future, for his future had been
bound up with his past and now, effectively, that past was flaming in ruins behind him. Dry sobs eddied
in his chest and he gripped the ship's rail yet more firmly.
His mind reluctantly brooded on Cymoril. He had laid her corpse upon a couch and had set fire to the
Tower. Then he had gone back to find the reavers successful, straggling back to their ships loaded with
loot and girl-slaves, jubilantly firing the tall and beautiful, buildings as they went.
He had caused to be destroyed the last tangible sign that the grandiose, magnificent Bright Empire had
ever existed. He felt that most of himself was gone with it.
Elric looked back at Imrryr and suddenly a greater sadness overwhelmed him as a tower, as deli-cate and
as beautiful as fine lace, cracked and toppled with flames leaping about it. He had shattered the last
great monument to the earlier race-his own race. Men might have learned again, one day, to build strong,
slender towers like those of Imrryr, but now the knowledge was dying with the thundering chaos of the
fall of the Dream-ing City and the fast-diminishing race of Melnibone. But what of the Dragon Masters?
Neither they nor their golden ships had met the attacking reavers- only their foot-soldiers had been there
to defend the city. Had they hidden/their ships in some secret waterway and fled inland when the reavers
overran the city? They had put up too short a fight to be truly beaten. It had been far too easy. Now that
the ships were retreating, were they planning some sud-den retaliation? Elric felt that they might have
such a plan-perhaps a plan concerning dragons. He shud-dered. He had told the others nothing of the
beasts which Melniboneans had controlled for centuries. Even now, someone might be unlocking the
gates of the underground Dragon Caves. He turned his mind away from the unnerving prospect.
As the fleet headed towards open sea, Elrics eyes were still looking sadly towards Imrryr as he paid
silent homage to the city of his forefathers and the dead Cymoril. He felt hot bitterness sweep over him
again as the memory of her death upon his own sword-point came sharply to him. He recalled her 
warning, when he had left her to go adventuring in the Young Kingdoms, that by putting Yyrkoon on the
Ruby Throne as Regent, by relinquishing his power for a year, he doubled them both. He cursed himself.
Then a muttering, like a roll .of distant thunder, spread through the fleet and he wheeled sharply, intent
on discovering the cause of the con-sternation.
Thirty golden-sailed Melnibonean battle barges had appeared on both sides of the harbour, issuing from
two mouths of the maze. Elric realised that they must have hidden in the other channels, wait-ing to
attack the fleet when they returned, satiated and depleted. Great war-galleys they were, the last ships of
Melnibone and the secret of their building was unknown. They had a sense of age and slumber-ing might
about them as they rowed swiftly, each with four or five banks of great sweeping oars, to en-circle the
raven ships.
Elric's fleet seemed to shrink before his eyes until it seemed as though it were a bobbing collection of
wood-shavings against the towering splendour of the shimmering battle barges. They were wellequipped
and flesh for a fight, whereas the weary reapers were intensely battle-tired. There was only one
way to save a small part of the fleet, Elric knew. He would have to conjure a witch-wind for sailpower.
Most-of the flagships were around him and he now occupied that of Yaris, for the youth had got himself
wildly drunk and had died by the knife of an Melnibonean slave wench, Next to Elric's ship was Count
Smiorgan's and the stocky Sea Lord was frowning, knowing full well that he and his ships, for all their
superior num-bers, would not stand up to a sea-fight. But the conjuring of winds great enough to move
many vessels was a dangerous thing, for it released colossal power and the elementals who controlled the
winds were apt to turn upon the sorcerer himself if he was not more than careful. But it was the only
chance, otherwise the rams which sent ripples from the golden prows would smash the reaver ships to
driftwood.
Steeling himself, Elric Began to speak the ancient and terrible, many-vowelled names of the beings who
existed in the air. Again, he could not risk the trance-state, for he had to watch for signs of the elementals
turning upon him. He called to them in a speech that was sometimes high like the cry of a gannet,
sometimes rolling like the roar of shore-bound surf, and the dim shapes of the Powers of the Wind
began to flit before his blurred gaze. His heart throbbed horribly in his ribs and his legs felt weal He
summoned all hisstrength and conjured a wind which shrieked wildly and chaotically about him, rocking
even the huge Melnibonean ships back and forth. Then he directed the wind and sent it into the sails of
some forty of the reaver ships. Many he could not save for they lay even outside his wide range. But
forty of the craft escaped the smashing rams and, amidst the sound of howling wind and sun-dered
timbers, leapt on the waves, their masts creak-ing as the wind cracked into their sails. Oars were torn
from the hands of the rowers, leaving a wake of broken wood on the white salt trail which boiled be-hind
each of the reaver ships.
Quite suddenly, they were beyond the slowly dos-ing circle of Melnibonean ships and careering madly
across the open sea, while all the crews sensed a dif-ference in the air and caught glimpses of strange,
soft-shaped forms around them. There was a discom- forting sense of evil about the beings which aided
them, an awesome alienness.
Smiorgan waved to Elric and grinned thankfully. 'We're safe, thanks to you, Elric!' he yelled across the
water. 'I knew you'd bring us luck!' Elric ignored him.
Now the Dragon Lords, vengeance-bent, gave chase. Almost as fast as the magic-aided reaver fleet were
the golden barges of Imrryr, and some reaver galleys, whose masts cracked and split beneath the force of
the wind driving them, were caught. Elric saw mighty grappling hooks of dully gleam-ing metal swing
out from the decks of the Imrryrian galleys and thud with a moan of wrenched timber into those of the
fleet which lay broken and power-less behind him. Fire leapt from catapults upon the Dragon Lords'
ships and careered towards many a fleeing reaver craft. Seating, foul-stinking flame hissed like lava
across the decks and ate into planks like vitriol into paper. Men shrieked, beating vainly at brightly
burning clothes, some leaping into water which would not extinguish the fire. Some sank beneath the sea
and it was possible to trace their descent as, flaming even below the surface, men and ships fluttered to 
the bottom like blazing, tired moths. Reaver decks, untouched by fire, ran red with reaver blood as the
enraged Imrryrian warriors swung down the grappling ropes and dropped among the raiders, wielding
great swords and battle-axes and wreaking terrible havoc amongst the sea-ravens. Imrryrian arrows and
Imrryrian javelins swooped from the towering decks of Imrryrian gal-leys and tore into the panicky men
on the smaller ships.
All this Elric saw as he and his vessels began slowly to overhaul the leading Imrryrian ship, flag-galley
of Admiral Magum Colim, commander of the Melnibonean fleet.
Now Elric spared a word for Count Smiorgan. 'We've outrun them!' he shouted above the howling wind
to the next ship where Smiorgan stood star-ing wide-eyed at the sky. 'But keep your ships heading
westwards or we're finished!'
But Smiorgan did not reply. He still looked sky-ward and there was horror in his eyes; in the eyes of a
man who, before this, had never known the quiver-ing bite of fear. Uneasily, Elric let his own eyes follow
the gaze of Smiorgan. Then he saw them. They were dragons, without doubt! The great reptiles
were some miles away, but Elric knew the stamp of the huge flying beasts. Theaverage wing-span of
these near-extinct monsters was some thirty feet across. Their snake-like bodies, beginning in a narrowsnouted
head and terminating in a dreadful whip of a tail were forty feet long and although they did not
breathe the legendary fire and smoke, Elric knew that 'their venom was combustible and could set fire to
wood or Fabric on contact. Imrryrian warriors rode the dragon backs. Armed with long, spear-like
goads, they blew strangely shaped horns which sang out curious notes over the turbulent sea and calm
blue sky. Nearing the golden fleet, now half-a-league away, the leading dragon sailed down and circled
towards the huge golden flag-galley, its wings making a sound like the crack of lightning as they beat
through the air. The grey-green, scaled monster hovered over the golden ship as it heaved in the whitefoamed
turbu-lent sea. Framed against the cloudless sky, the dragon was in sharp perspective and it was
possible for Elric to get a clear view of it. The goad which the Dragon Master waved to Admiral Magum
Colim was a long, slim spear upon which the strange pen-nant of black and yellow zig-zag lines was,
even at this distance, noticeable. Elric recognised the insig-nia on the pennant.
Dyvim Tvar, friend of Elric's youth, Lord of the Dragon Caves, was leading his charges to claim vengeance
for Imrryr the Beautiful.
Elric howled across the water to Smiorgan. 'These are your main danger, now. Do what you can to stave
them off!' There was a rattle of iron as the men prepared, near-hopelessly, to repel the new menace.
Witch-wind would give little advantage over the fast-flying dragons. Now Dyvim Tvar had evidently
conferred with Magum Colim and his goad lashed out at the dragon throat. The huge reptile jerked
upwards and began to gain altitude. Eleven other dragons were behind it, joining it now. With seeming
slowness, the dragons began to beat relentlessly towards the reaver fleet as the crewmen prayed to their
own Gods for a miracle. They were doomed. There was no escaping the fact. Every reaver ship was
doomed and the raid had been fruitless.
Elric could see the despair in the faces of the men as the masts of the reaver ships continued to bend
under the strain of the shrieking witch-wind. They could do nothing, now, but die...
Elric fought to rid his mind of the swirling uncer-tainty which filled it. He drew his sword and felt the
pulsating, evil power which lurked in rune-carved Stormbringer. But he hated that power now-for it had
caused him to kill the only human he had cher-ished. He realised how much of his strength he owed to
the black-iron sword of his fathers and how weak he might be without it. He was an albino and that
meant that he lacked the vitality of a normal human being. Savagely, futilely, as the mist in his mind was
replaced by red fear, he cursed the pretensions of re-venge he had held, cursed the day when he had
agreed to lead the raid on Imrryr and most of all he bitterly vilified dead Yyrkoon and his twisted envy
which had been the cause of the whole doom-ridden course of events.
But it was too late now for curses of any kind. The loud slapping of beating dragon wings filled the air
and the monsters loomed over the fleeing reaver craft. He had to make some kind of decision-though he
had no love for life, he refused to die by the hands of his own people. When he died, he promised 
himself, it would be by his own hand. He made his decision, hating himself.
He called off the witch-wind as the dragon venom seared down and struck the last ship in line. He put
all his powers into sending a stronger wind into the sails of his own boat while his bewil-deled comrades
in the suddenly becalmed ships called over the water, inquiring desperately the rea-son for his act. Elric's
ship was moving fast, now, and might just escape the dragons. He hoped so. He deserted the man who
had trusted him, Count Smiorgan, and watched as venom" poured from the sky and engulfed him in
blazing green and scarlet flame. Elric fled, keeping his mind from thoughts of the future, and sobbed
aloud, that proud prince of ruins; and he cursed the malevolent Gods for the black day when idly, for
their amusement, they had spawned men.
Behind him, the last reaver ships flared into sud-den appalling brightness and, although half-thankful that
they had escaped the fate of their comrades, the crew looked at Elric accusingly. He sobbed on, not
heeding them, great griefs racking his soul. A night later, off the coast of an island called Pan Tang,
when the ship was safe from the dreadful re-criminations of the Dragon Masters and their beasts, Elric
stood brooding in the stern while the men eyed him with fear and hatred, muttering of betrayal and
heartless cowardice. They appeared to have forgot-ten their own fear and subsequent safety., Elric
brooded, and he held the black runesword in his two hands. Stormbringer was more than an ordi-nary
battle-blade, this he had known for years, but now he realised that it was possessed of more sen-tience
than he had imagined. The frightful thing had used its wielder and had made Elric destroy Cymoril. Yet
he was horribly dependent upon it: he realised this with .soul-rending certainty. But he feared and
resented the sword's power-hated it bit-terly for the chaos it had wrought in his brain and spirit. In an
agony of uncertainty he held the blade in his hands and forced himself to weigh the factors involved.
Without the sinister sword, he would lose pride-perhaps even life-but he might know the soothing
tranquillity of pure rest; with it he would have power and strength-but the sword would guide him into a
doom-racked future. He would sa-vour power-but never peace.
He drew a great, sobbing breath and, blind mis-giving influencing him, threw the sword into the moondrenched
sea.
Incredibly, it did not sink. It did not even float on the water. It fell point forwards into the sea and
stuck there, quivering as if it were embedded in timber. It remained throbbing in the water, six inches of
its blade immersed, and began to give off a weird devil-scream-a howl of horrible malevolence. With a
choking curse Elric stretched out his slim, whitely gleaming hand, trying to recover the sen-tient
hellblade. He stretched further, leaning far out over the rail. He could not grasp it-it lay some feet from
him, still. Gasping, a sickening sense of defeat overwhelming him, he dropped over the side and plunged
into the bone-chilling water, striking out with strained, grotesque strokes, towards the hovering sword.
He was beaten-the sword had won. He reached it and put his fingers around the hilt. At once it settled in
his hand and Elric felt strength seep slowly back into his aching body. Then he real-ised that he and the
sword were interdependent, for though he needed the blade, Stormbringer, parasitic, required a userwithout
a man to wield it, the blade was also powerless.
'We must be bound to one another then,' Elric murmured despairingly. 'Bound by hell-forged chains and
fate-haunted circumstance. Well, then-let it be thus so-and men will have cause to tremble and flee when
they hear the names of Elric of Melni-bone and Stormbringer, his sword. We are two of a kind-produced
by an age which has deserted us. Let us give this age cause to hate us!' Strong again, Elric sheathed
Stormbringer and the sword settled against his side; then, with powerful strokes, he began to swim
towards the island while the men he left on the ship breathed with relief and speculated whether he
would live or perish in the bleak waters of that strange and nameless sea...
Book Two
WHILE THE GODS LAUGH
I, while the gods laugh, the world's vortex am;
Maelstrom of passions in that hidden sea Whose waves of all-time lap the coasts of me, And in small
compass the dark waters cram.
Mervyn Peake, Shapes and Sounds,
1941.
ONE
One night, as Elric sat moodily drinking alone in a tavern, a wingless woman of Myyrrhn came gliding
out of the storm and rested her lithe body against him.
Her face was thin and frail-boned, almost as white as Elric's own albino skin, and she wore flimsy palegreen
robes which contrasted well with her dark red hair.
The tavern was ablaze with candle-flame and alive with droning argument and gusty laughter, but the
words of the woman of Myyrrhn came clear and liq-uid, carrying over the zesty din.
'I have sought you twenty days,' she said to Elric who regarded her insolently through hooded crim-son
eyes and lazed in a high-backed chair; a silver wine-cup in his long-fingered right hand and his left on
the pommel of his sorcerous runesword Storm-bringer.
'Twenty days,' murmured the Melnibonean softly, speaking as if to himself; deliberately rude. 'A long
time for a beautiful and lonely woman to be wander-ing the world.' He opened his eyes a trifle wider and
spoke to her directly: 'I am Elric of Melnibone, as you evidently know. I grant no favours and ask none.
Bearing this in mind, tell me why you have sought me for twenty days.'
Equably, the woman replied, undaunted by the al-bino's supercilious tone. 'You are a bitter man, Elric;
I know this also-and you are grief-haunted for rea-sons which are already legend. I ask you no fa-voursbut
bring you myself and a proposition. What do you desire most in the world?'
'Peace,' Elric told her simply. Then he smiled ironically and said: 'I am an evil man, lady, and my destiny
is hell-doomed, but I am not unwise, nor un-fair. Let me remind you a little of the truth. Call this legend
if you prefer-I do not care. 'A woman died a year ago, on the blade of my trusty sword.' He patted the
blade sharply and his eyes were suddenly hard and self-mocking. 'Since then I have courted no woman
and desired none. Why should I break such secure habits? If asked; I grant you that I could speak poetry
to you, and that you have a grace and beauty which moves me to in-teresting speculation, but I would not
!0ad any part of my dark burden upon one as exquisite as you. Any relationship between us, other than
formal, would necessitate my unwilling shifting of part of that burden.' He paused for an instant and then
said slowly: 'I should admit that I scream in my sleep sometimes and am often tortured by
incommunicable self-loathing. Go while you can, lady, and forget Elric for he can bring only grief to
your soul.' With a quick movement he turned his gaze from her and lifted the silver wine-cup, draining it
and re-plenishing it from a jug at his side. 'No,' said the wingless Woman of Myyrrhn calmly, 'I will not.
Come with me.'
She rose and gently took Elric's hand. Without knowing why, Elric allowed himself to be led from the
tavern and out into the wild, rainless storm which howled around the Filkharian city of Raschil. A
protective and cynical smile hovered about his mouth as she drew him towards the sea-lashed quay-side
where she told him her name. Shaarilla of the Dancing Mist, wingless daughter of a dead necro-mancer-a
cripple in her own strange land, and an outcast. - Elric felt uncomfortably drawn to this calm-eyed
woman who wasted few words. He felt a great surge of emotion well within him; emotion, he had never
thought to experience again, and he wanted to take her finely moulded shoulders and press her slim body
to his. But he quelled the urge and studied her marble delicacy and her wild hair which flowed in the
wind about her head.
Silence rested comfortably between them while the chaotic wind howled mournfully over the sea. Here,
Elric could ignore the warm stink of the city and he felt almost relaxed. At last, looking away from him
towards the swirling sea, her .green robe curling in the wind, she said: 'You have heard, of course, of the 
Dead Gods' Book?'
Elric nodded. He was interested, despite the need he felt to disassociate himself as much as possible from
his fellows. The mythical book was believed to contain knowledge which could solve many problems
that had plagued men for centuries-it held a holy and mighty wisdom which every sorcerer desired to
sample. But it was believed destroyed, hurled into the sun when the Old Gods were dying in the cosmic
wastes which lay beyond the outer reaches of the so-lar system. Another: legend, apparently of later
origin, spoke vaguely of the dark ones who had in-terrupted the Book's sunward coursing and had stolen
it before it could be destroyed. Most scholars discounted this legend, arguing that, by this time, the book
would have come to light if it did still ex-ist.
Elric made himself speak flatly so that he ap-peared to be disinterested when he answered Shaa-rilla.
'Why do you mention the Book?' 'I know that it exists,' Shaarilla replied intensely, 'and I know where it
is. My father acquired the knowledge just before he died. Myself-and the book-you may have if you will
help me get it.' Could the secret of peace be contained in the book? Elric wondered. Would he, if he
found it, be able to dispense with Stormbringer? 'If you want it so badly that you seek my help,' he said
eventually, 'why do you not wish to keep it?' 'Because I would be afraid to have such a thing perpetually
in my custody-it is not a book for a woman to own, but you are possibly the last mighty nigromancer left
in the world and it is fitting that you should have it. Besides, you might kill me to ob-tain it-I would
never be safe with such a volume in my hands. I need only one small part of its wisdom.' 'What is that?'
Elric inquired, studying her patti-clan beauty with a new pulse stirring within him. Her mouth set and
the lids fell over her eyes. 'When we have the book in our hands-then you will have your answer. Not
before.'
'This answer is good enough,' Elric remarked quickly, seeing that he would gain no more informa-tion at
that stage. 'And the answer appeals to me.' Then, half before he realised it, he seized her shoul-ders in his
slim, pale hands and pressed his colour-less lips to her scarlet mouth.
Elric and Shaarilla rode westwards, towards the Silent Land, across the lush plains of Shazaar where
their ship had berthed two days earlier. The border country between Shazaar and the Silent Land was a
lonely stretch of territory, unoccupied even by peasant dwellings; a no-man's land, though fertile and rich
in natural wealth. The inhabitants of Sha-zaar had deliberately refrained from extending their borders
further, for though the dwellers in the Silent Land rarely ventured beyond the Marshes of the Mist, the
natural borderline between the two lands, the inhabitants of Shazaar held their unknown neighbours in
almost superstitious fear. The journey had been clean and swift, though ominous, with several persons
who should have known nothing of their purpose warning the tray-tilers of nearing danger. Elric
brooded, recognising the signs of doom but choosing to ignore them and communicate nothing to
Shaarilla who, for her part, seemed content with Elric's silence. They spoke little in the day and so saved
their breath for the wild love-play of the night.
The thud of the two horses' hooves on the soft turf, the muted creak and darer of Elric's harness and
sword, were the only sounds to break the stillness of the clear winter day as the pair rode steadily,
nearing the quaking, treacherous trails of the Marshes of the Mist.
One gloomy night, they reached the borders of the SilentLand, marked by the marsh, and they halted and
made camp, pitching their silk tent on a hill overlooking the mist-shrouded wastes. Banked like black
pillows against the horizon, the clouds were ominous, The moon lurked behind them, sometimes
piercing them sufficiently to send a pale tentative beam down on to the glistening marsh or its ragged,
grassy frontiers. Once, a moonbeam glanced off silver, illuminating the dark silhouette of Elric, but, as if
repelled by the sight of a living crea-ture on that bleak hill, the moon once again slunk behind its cloudshield,
leaving Elric thinking deeply. Leaving Elric in the darkness he desired. Thunder rumbled over
distant mountains, sound-ing like the laughter of far-off Gods. Elric shivered, pulled his blue cloak more
tightly about him, and continued to stare over the misted lowlands. Shaarilla came to him soon, and she
stood beside him, swathed in a thick woollen cloak which could not keep out all the damp chill in the air.
'The Silent Land,' she murmured. 'Are all the sto-ries true, Elric? Did they teach you of it in old 
Melnibone?'
Elric frowned, annoyed that she had disturbed his thoughts. He turned abruptly to look at her, staring
blankly through his crimson-irised eyes for a mo-ment and then saying flatly:
'The inhabitants are unhuman and feared. This I know. Few men ventured into their territory, ever. None
have returned, to my knowledge. Even in the days when Melnibone was a powerful Empire, this was one
nation my ancestors never ruled-nor did they desire to do so. The denizens of the Silent Land are said to
be a dying race, far more evil than my an-cestors ever were, who enjoyed dominion over the Earth long
before men gained any sort of power. They rarely venture beyond the confines of their ter-ritory,
nowadays, encompassed as it is by marshland and mountains.'
Shaarilla laughed, then, with little humour. 'So they are unhuman are they, Elric? Then what of my
people, who are related to them? What of me, Elric?' 'You're human enough for me,' replied Elric insouciantly,
looking her in the eyes. She smiled. 'No compliment,' she said, 'but I'll take it for one-until
your glib tongue finds a better.' That night they slept restlessly and, as he had predicted, Elric screamed
agonisingly in his turbu-lent, terror-filled sleep and he called a name which made Shaarilla's eyes fill
with pain and jealousy. That name was Cymoril. Wide-eyed in his grim sleep, Elric seemed lto be
staring at the one he named, speaking other words in a sibilant language which made Shaarilla block her
ears and shudder.
The next morning, as they broke camp, folding the rustling fabric of the yellow silk tent between them,
Shaarilla avoided looking at Elric directly but later, since he made no move to speak, she asked him a
question in a voice which shook somewhat. It was a question which she needed to ask, but one which
came hard to her lips. 'Why do you desire the Dead Gods' Book, Elric? What do you believe you will
find in it?'
Elric shrugged, dismissing the question, but she repeated her words less slowly, with more insistence.
'Very well then,' he said eventually. 'But it is not easy to answer you in a few sentences. I desire, if you
like, to know one of two things.'
'And what is that, Elric?'
The tall albino dropped the folded tent to the grass and sighed. His fingers played nervously with the
pommel of his runesword. 'Can an ultimate God exist-or not? That is what I need to know, Shaarilla, if
my life is to have any direction at all. 'The Lords of Law and Chaos now govern our lives. But is there
some being greater than them?' Shaarilla put a hand on Elric's arm. 'Why must you know?' she said.
'Despairingly, sometimes, I seek the comfort of a benign God, Shaarilla. My mind goes out, lying awake
at night, searching through black barrenness for something-anything-which will take me to it, warm me,
protect me, tell me that there is order in the chaotic tumble of the universe; that it is consist-ent, this
precision of the planets, not simply a brief, bright spark of sanity in an eternity of malevolent anarchy.'
Elric sighed and his quiet tones were tinged with hopelessness. 'Without some confirmation of the order
of things, my only comfort is to accept the anarchy. This way, I can revel in chaos and know, without
fear, that we are all doomed from the start-that our brief existence is both meaningless and damned. I
can accept then, that we are more than forsaken, because there was never anything there to forsake us. I
have weighed the proof, Shaarilla, and must be-lieve that anarchy prevails, in spite of all the laws which
seemingly govern our actions, our sorcery, our logic. I see only chaos in the world. If the Book we seek
tells me otherwise, then I shall gladly believe it. Until then, I will put my trust only in my sword and
myself.'
Shaarilla stared at Elric strangely. 'Could not this philosophy of yours have been influenced by recent
events in your past? Do you fear the consequences of your murder and treachery? Is it not more comforting
for you to believe in deserts which are rarely just?'
Elric turned on her, crimson eyes blazing in anger, but even as he made to speak, the anger fled him and
he dropped his eyes towards the ground, hood-ing them from her gaze.
'Perhaps,' he said lamely. 'I do not know. That is the only real truth, Shaarilla. I do not know:
Shaarilla nodded, her face lit by an enigmatic sym-pathy; but Elric did not see the look she gave him, for 
his own eyes were full of crystal tears which flowed down his lean, white face and took his strength and
will momentarily from him. 'I am a man possessed,' he groaned, 'and without this devil-blade I carry I
would not be a man at all.'
TWO
They mounted their swift, black horses and spurred them with abandoned savagery down the hillside
towards the Marsh, their cloaks whipping be-hind them as the wind caught them, lashing them high into
the air. Both rode with set, hard faces, re-fusing to acknowledge the aching uncertainty which lurked
within them.
And the horses' hooves had splashed into quaking bogland before they could halt.
Cursing, Elric tugged hard on his reins, pulling his horse back on to firm ground. Shaarilla, too, fought
her own panicky stallion and .guided the beast to the safety of the turf.
'How do we cross?' Elric asked her impatiently.
'There was a map-" Shaarilla began hesitantly.
"Where is it?"
'It-it was lost. I lost it. But I tried hard to memo-rise it. I think I'll be able to get us safely across.' 'How
did you lose it-and why didn't you tell me of this before?' Elric stormed.
'I'm sorry, Elric-but for a whole day, just before I found you in that tavern, my memory was gone.
Somehow, I lived through a day without knowing it-and when I awoke, the map was missing.' Elric
frowned. 'There is some force working against us, I am Sure,' he muttered, 'but what it is, I do not know.'
He raised his voice and said to her. "Let us hope that your memory is not too faulty, now. These
Marshes are infamous the world over, but by all accounts, only natural hazards wait for us.' He grimaced
and put his fingers around the hilt of his runesword. 'Best go first, Shaarilla, but stay dose. Lead the
way.'
She nodded, dumbly, and turned her horse's head towards the north, galloping along the bank until she
came to a place where a great, tapering rock loomed. Here, a grassy path, four feet or so across, led out
into the misty marsh. They could only see a little distance ahead, because of the dinging mist, but it
seemed that the trail remained firm for some way. Shaarilla walked her horse on to the path and jolted
forward at a slow trot, Elric following imme-diately behind her.
Through the swirling, heavy mist which shone whitely, the horses moved hesitantly and their riders had
to keep them on short, tight rein. The mist padded the marsh with silence and the gleaming, watery fens
around them stank with foul putres-cence. No animal scurried, no bird shrieked above them. Everywhere
was a haunting, fear-laden silence which made both horses and riders uneasy. With panic in their
throats, Elric and Shaarilla rode on, deeper and deeper into the unnatural Marshes of the Mist, their eyes
wary and even their nostrils quivering for scent of danger in the stinking morass.
Hours later, when the sun was long past its zenith, Shaarilla's horse reared, screaming and whinnying.
She shouted for Elric, her exquisite features twisted in fear as she stared into the mist. He spurred his
own bucking horse forwards and joined her. Something moved, slowly, menacingly in the ding-ing
whiteness. Elric's right hand whipped over to his left side and grasped the hilt of Stormbringer. The
blade shrieked out of its scabbard, a black fire gleaming along its length and alien power flow-ing from it
into Elric's arm and through his body. A weird, unholy light leapt into Elric's crimson eyes and his mouth
was wrenched into a hideous grin as he forced the frightened horse further into the skulking mist.
'Arioch, Lord of the Seven Darks, be with me now!' Elric yelled as he made out the shifting shape ahead
of him. It was white, like the mist, yet some-how darker. It, stretched high above Elric's head. It was
nearly eight feet tall and almost as broad. But it t was still only an outline, Seeming to have no face or
limbs-only movement: darting, malevolent move-ment! But Arioch, his patron god, chose not to hear.
Elric could feel his horse's great heart beating be-tween his legs as the beast plunged forward under its
rider's iron control. Shaarilla was screaming some-thing behind him, but he could not hear the words. 
Elric hacked at the white shape, but his sword met only mist and it howled angrily. The fear-crazed horse
would go no further and Elric was forced to dismount.
'Keep hold of the steed,' he shouted behind him to Shaarilla and moved on light feet towards the dart-ing
shape which hovered ahead of him, blocking his path.
Now he could make out some of its saliencies. Two eyes, the colour of thin, yellow wine, were set high
in the thing's body, though it had no separate head. A mouthing, obscene slit, filled with fangs, lay just
beneath the eyes. It had no nose or ears that El-tic could see. Four appendages sprang from its upper
parts and its lower body slithered along the ground, unsupported by any limbs. Elric's eyes ached as he
looked at it. It was incredibly disgusting to behold and its amorphous body gave off a stench of death and
decay. Fighting down his fear, the albino inched forward warily, his sword held high to parry any thrust
the thing might make with its arms. Elric recognised it from a description in one of his gri-moires. It was
a Mist Giant-possibly the only Mist Giant, Bellbane. Even the wisest wizards were uncer-tain how many
existed-one or many. It was a ghoul of the swamp-lands which fed off the souls and the blood of men
and beasts. But the Marshes of this Mist were Par to the east of Bellbane's reputed haunts.
Elric ceased to wonder why so few animals in-habited that stretch of the swamp. Overhead the sky was
beginning to darken.
Stormbringer throbbed in Elric's grasp as he called the names of the ancient Demon-Gods of his people.
The nauseous ghoul obviously recognised the names, For an instant, it wavered backwards. El-tic made
his legs move towards the thing. Now he saw that the ghoul was not white at all. But it had no colour to
it that Elric could recognise. There was a suggestion of orangeness dashed with sickening greenish
yellow, but he did not see the colours with his eyes-he only sensed the alien, unholy tinctures. Then
Elric rushed towards the thing, shouting the names which now had no meaning to his surface consciousness.
"Balaan-Marthim! Aesma! Alastor! Sae-bos! Verdelet! Nizilfkm! Haborym! Haborym of the
Fires Which Destroy!' His whole mind was torn in two. Part of him wanted to run, to hide, but he .had no
control over the power which now gripped him and pushed him to meet the horror.
His sword blade hacked and slashed at the shape. It
was like trying to cut through water-sentient, pulsating
water. But Stormbringer
had effect. The
whole shape of the ghoul quivered as if in dreadful pain. Elric felt himself plucked into the air and his
vision went. He could see nothing-do nothing but hack and cut at the thing which now held him. Sweat
poured from him as, blindly, he fought on. Pain which was hardly physical-a deeper, horrify-ing pain,
filled his being as he howled now in agony and struck continually at the yielding bulk which embraced
him and was pulling him slowly towards its gaping maw. He struggled and writhed in the ob-scene grasp
of the thing. With powerful arms, it was holding him, almost lasciviously, drawing him closer as a rough
lover would draw a girl. Even the mighty power intrinsic in the runesword did not seem enough to kill
the monster. Though its efforts were somewhat weaker than earlier, it still drew Elric nearer to the
gnashing, slavering mouth-slit. Elric cried the names again, while Stormbringer danced and sang an evil
song in his right hand. In agony, Elric writhed, praying, begging and promis-ing, but still he was drawn
inch by inch towards the grinning maw.
Savagely, grimly, he fought and again he screamed for Arioch. A mind touched his-sardonic, powerful,
evil-and he knew Arioch responded at last! Almost imperceptibly, the Mist Giant weakened. Elric
pressed his advantage and the knowledge that the ghoul was losing its strength gave him more power.
Blindly, agony piercing every nerve of his body, he struck and struck, Then, quite suddenly, he was
falling. He seemed to fall for hours, slowly, weightlessly until he landed upon a surface which yielded
beneath him. He began to sink.
Far off, beyond time and space, he heard a distant voice calling to him. He did not want to hear it; he was
content to lie where he was as the cold, comfort-ing stuff in which he lay dragged him slowly into it-self.
Then some sixth sense made him realise that it was Shaarilla's voice calling him and he forced him-self 
to make sense out of her words. "Elric-the marshy You're in the marsh. Don't move!"
He smiled to himself. Why should he move? Down he was sinking, slowly, calmly-down into the
welcoming marsh ... Had there been another time like this; another marsh? - With a mental jolt, full
awareness of the situation came back to him and he jerked his eyes open. Above him was mist. To one
side a pool of unnam-able colouring was slowly evaporating, giving off a foul odour. On the other side
he could lust make out a human form, gesticulating wildly. Beyond the human form were the barely
discernible shapes of two horses. Shaarilla was there. Beneath him-- . Beneath him was the marsh.
Thick, stinking slime was sucking him downwards as he lay spread-eagled upon it, half-submerged
already. Stormbringer was still in his right hand. He could just see it if he turned his head. Carefully, he
tried to lift the top half of his body from the sucking morass. He succeeded, only to feel his legs sink
deeper. Sitting upright, he shouted to the girl
'Shaarilla! Quickly-a rope!'
'There is no rope, Elric!' She was ripping off her top garment, frantically tearing it into strips. Still Elric
sank, his feet finding no purchase beneath them.
Shaarilla hastily knotted the strips of cloth. She flung the makeshift rope inexpertly towards the sink-ing
albino. It fell short. Fumbling in her haste, she threw it again. This time his groping left hand found it.
The girl began to haul on the fabric. Elric felt himself rise a little and then stop.
'It's no good, Elric-I haven't the strength.' Cursing her, Elric shouted: 'The horse-tie it to the horse!'
She ran towards one of the horses and looped the cloth around the pommel of the saddle. Then she
tugged at the beast's reins and began to walk it away.
Swiftly, Elric was dragged from the sucking bog and, still gripping Stormbringer was pulled to the
inadequate safety of the strip of turf. Gasping, he tried to stand, but found his legs in-credibly weak
beneath him. He rose; staggered, and fell. Shaarilla knelt down beside him. 'Are you hurt?'
Elric smiled in spite of his weakness. 'I don't think SO.'
'It was dreadful. I couldn't see properly what was happening. You seemed to disappear and then-then you
screamed that-that name!' She was trembling, her face pale and taut.
'What name?' Elric was genuinely puzzled. 'What name did I scream?'
She shook her head. 'It doesn't matter-but what-ever it was-it saved you. You reappeared soon afterwards
and fell into the marsh...'
Stormbringer's power was still flowing into the al-bino. He already felt stronger.
With an effort, he got up and stumbled unsteadily towards his horse.
'I'm sure that the Mist Giant does not usually haunt this marsh-it was sent here. By what-or whom-I don't
know, but we must get to firmer ground while we can.'
Shaarilla said: 'Which way-back or forward?' Elric frowned. 'Why, forward, of course. Why do you ask?'
She swallowed and shook her head. 'Let's hurry, then,' she said.
They mounted their horses and rode with little caution until the marsh and its cloak of mist was be-hind
them.
Now the journey took on a new urgency as Elric realised that some force was attempting to put obstacles
in their way. They rested little and savagely rode their powerful horses to a virtual standstill. On the
fifth day they were riding through barren, rocky country and a light rain was Falling. The hard ground
was slippery so that they were forced to ride more slowly, huddled over the sodden necks of their horses,
muffled it/ cloaks which only inadequately kept out the drizzling rain. They had ridden in silence for
some time before they heard a ghastly cackling baying ahead of them and the rattle of hooves.
Elric motioned towards a large rock looming to their right. 'Shelter there,' he said. 'Something comes
towards us-possibly more enemies. With luck, they'll pass us.' Shaarilla mutely obeyed him and to-gether
they waited as the hideous baying grew nearer.
'One rider-several other beasts,' Elric said, listen-ing intently. 'The beasts either follow or pursue the
rider.'
Then they were in sight-racing through the rain. A man frantically spurring an equally frightened horse-
and behind him, the" distance decreasing, a pack of what at first appeared to be dogs. But these were not
dogs-they were half-dog and half-bird, with the lean, shaggy bodies and legs of dogs but possessing
birdlike talons in place of paws and sav-agely curved beaks which snapped where muzzles should have
been.
'The hunting dogs of the Dharzi!' gasped Shaa-rilla. 'I thought that they, like their masters, were long
extinct!'
'I, also,' Elric said. 'What are they doing in these parts? There was never contact between the Dharzi and
the dwellers of this Land.'
'Brought here-by something; Shaarilla whispered.
'Those devil-dogs will scent us to be sure.' Elric reached for his runesword. 'Then we can lose nothing by
aiding their quarry,' he said, urging his mount forward. 'Wait here, Shaarilla.' By this time, the devil-pack
and the man they pur-sued were rushing past the sheltering rock, speeding down a narrow defile. Elric
spurred his horse down the slope.
'Ho there!' he shouted to the frantic rider. 'Turn and stand, my friend-I'm here to aid you!' His moaning
runesword lifted high, Elric thun-dered towards the snapping, howling devil-dogs and his horse's hooves
struck one with an impact which broke the unnatural beast's spine. There were some five or six" of the
weird dogs left. The rider turned his horse and drew a long sabre from a scabbard at his waist. He was a
small man, with a broad ugly mouth. He grinned in relief.
'A lucky chance, this meeting, good master!' This was all he had time to remark before two of the dogs
were leaping at him and he was forced to give his whole attention to defending himself from their
slashing talons and snapping beaks. The other three dogs concentrated their vicious at-tention upon
Elric. One leapt high, its beak aimed at Elric's throat. He felt foul breath on his Face and hastily brought
Stormbringer round in an arc which chopped the dog in two. Filthy blood spattered Elric and his horse
and the scent of it seemed to increase the fury of the other dogs' attack. But the blood made the dancing
black runesword sing an almost ec-static tune and Elric felt it writhe in his grasp and stab at another of
the hideous dogs. The point Elric said coldly, 'The Lady Shaarilla-Master Moonglum of--?'
'Of Elwher,' Moonglum supplied, 'The mercantile capital of the East-the finest city in the world.' Elric
recognised the name. 'So you are from El-wher, Master Moonglum. I have heard of the place. A new
city, is it not? Some few centuries old. You have ridden far.'
'Indeed I have, sir. Without knowledge of the lan-guage used in these parts, the journey would have been
harder, but luckily the slave who inspired me with tales of his homeland taught me the speech
thoroughly.'
'But why do you travel these parts-have you not heard the legends?' Shaarilla spoke incredulously.
'Those very legends were what brought me hence-and I'd begun to discount them, until those unpleasant
pups set uPon me. For what reason they decided to give chase, I will not know, for I gave them no cause
to take a dislike to me. This is, indeed, a barbarous land;' Elric was uncomfortable. Light talk of the kind
which Moonglum seemed to enjoy was contrary to his own brooding nature. But in spite of this, he
found that he was liking the man more and more. It was Moonglum who suggested that they travel
together for a while. Shaarilla objected, giving Elric a warning glance, but he ignored it. 'Very well then,
friend Moonglum, since three are stronger than two, we'd appreciate your company. We ride towards the
mountains.' Elric, himself, was feeling in a more cheerful mood.
'And what do you seek there?, Moonglum in. quired.
'A secret,' Elric said, and his new-found compan-ion was discreet enough to drop the question.
THREE
So they rode, while the rainfall increased and splashed and sang among the rocks with the sky like dull
steel above them and the wind crooning a dirge about their ears. Three small figures riding swiftly
towards the black mountain barrier which rose over the world like a brooding God. And perhaps it was a 
God that laughed sometimes as they neared the foothills of the range, or perhaps it was the wind
whistling through the dark mystery of canyons and precipices and the tumble of basalt and granite which
climbed towards lonely peaks: Thunder clouds formed around those peaks and lightning smashed
downwards like a monster finger searching the earth for grubs. Thunder rattled over the range and
Shaarilla spoke her thoughts at last to Elric; spoke them as the mountains came in sight. 'Elric-let us go
back, I beg you. Forget the Book-there are too many forces working against us. Take heed of the signs,
Elric, or we are doomed!' But Elric was grimly silent, for he had long been aware that the girl was losing
her enthusiasm for the quest she had started.
'Elric-please. We will never reach the Book. El, ric, turn back.:
She rode beside him, pulling at his garments until impatiently he shrugged himself clear of her grasp and
said:
"I am intrigued too much to stop now. Either con-tinue to lead the way-or tell me what you know and
stay here. You desired to sample the Book's wisdom once-but now a few minor pitfalls on our journey
have frightened you. What was it you needed to learn, Shaarilla?'
She did not answer him, but said instead: 'And what was it you desired, Elric? Peace, you told me. Well,
I warn you, you'll find no peace in those grim mountains-if we reach them at all.' 'You have not been
frank with me, Shaarilla,' Elric said coldly, still looking ahead of him at the black peaks. 'You know
something of the forces seeking to stop us.'
She shrugged. 'It matters not-I know little. My fa-ther spoke a few vague warnings before he died, that is
all.'
'What did he say?'
'He said that He who guards the Book would use all his power to stop mankind from using its wis-dom.'
'What else?'
'Nothing else. But it is enough, now that I see that my father's warning was truly spoken. It was this
guardian who killed him, Elric-or one of the guardian's minions. I do not wish to suffer that fate, in spite
of what the Book might do for me. I had thought you Powerful enough to aid me-but now I doubt it.'
'I have protected you so far,' Elrie said simply.
'Now tell me what you seek from the Book?"
'I am too ashamed.'
Elric did not press the question, but eventually she spoke softly, almost whispering. 'I sought my wings,'
she said.
'Your wings-y0u mean the Book might give you a spell so that you could grow wings!' Elric smiled
ironically. 'And that is why you seek the vessel of the world's mightiest wisdom!'
'If you Were thought deformed in your own land-it would seem important enough to you,' she shouted
defiantly.
Elric turned his face towards her, his crimson-irised eyes burning with a strange emotion. He put a hand
to his dead white skin and a crooked smile twisted his lips. 'I, too, have felt as you do,' lie said quietly.
That was all he said and Shaarilla dropped behind him again, shamed.
They rode on in silence until Moonglum, who had been riding discreetly ahead, cocked his overlarge
skull on one side and suddenly drew rein. Elric joined him. 'What is it, Moonglum?'
'I hear horses coming this way,' the little man said. 'And voices which are disturbingly familiar. More of
those devil-dogs, Elric-and this time accompanied by riders!'
Elric, too, heard the sounds, now, and shouted a . warning to Shaarilla.
'Perhaps you were right,' he called. 'More trouble comes towards us.'
'What now?' Moonglum said, frowning. 'Ride for the mountains,' Elric replied, 'and we may yet
outdistance them.'
They spurred their steeds into a fast gallop and sped towards the hills.
But their flight was hopeless. Soon a black, pack was visible on the horizon and the sharp birdlike baying
of the devil-dogs-drew nearer. Elric stared backward at their pursuers. Night was beginning to fall, and 
visibility was decreasing with every passing moment but he had a vague impression of the riders who
raced behind the pack. They were swathed in dark cloaks and carried long spears. Their faces were
invisible, lost in the shadow of the hoods which cov-ered their heads.
Now Elric and his companions were forcing their horses up a steep incline, seeking the shelter of the
rocks which lay above.
'We'll halt here,' Elric ordered, 'and try to hold them off. In the open they could easily surround us.'
Moonglum nodded affirmatively, agreeing with the good sense contained in Elric's words. They pulled
their sweating steeds tO a standstill and prepared to join battle with the howling pack and their darkcloaked
masters.
Soon the first of the devil-dogs were rushing up the incline, their beak-jaws slavering and their talons
rattling on stone. Standing between two rocks, block-ing the way between with their bodies, Elric and
Moonglum met the first attack and quickly dis-patched three of the animals. Several more took the place
of the dead and the first of the riders was visible behind them as night crept closer. 'Arioch!' swore Elric,
suddenly recognising the riders. 'These are the Lords of Dharzi---dead these ten centuries. We're fighting
dead men, Moonglum, and the too-tangible ghosts of their dogs. Unless I can think of a sorcerous means
to defeat them, we're doomed!'
The zombie-men appeared to have no intention of taking part in the attack for the moment. They waited,
their dead eyes eerily luminous, as the devil-dogs attempted to break through the swinging net-work of
steel with which Elric and his companion defended themselves. Elric was racking his brains--- trying to
dredge a spoken spell from his memory which would dismiss these living dead. Then it came to him, and
hoping that the forces he had to invoke would decide to aid him, he began to chant:
'Let the Laws which govern all things Not so lightly be dismissed;
Let the Ones who flaunt the Earth Kings With a fresher death be kissed.'
Nothing happened. 'I've failed.' Elric muttered hopelessly as he met the attack of a mapping devil-dog
and spitted the thing on his sword. But then-the ground rocked and seemed to seethe beneath the feet of
the horses upon whose backs the dead men sat. The tremor lasted a few seconds and then subsided.
'The spell was not powerful enough,' Elric sighed. The earth trembled again and small craters formed in
the ground of the hillside upon which the dead Lords of Dharzi impassively waited: Stones crumbled and
the horses stamped nervously. Then the earth rumbled.
'Back!' yelled Elric warningly. 'Back-or we'll go with them!' They retreated-backing towards Shaa-rilla
and their waiting horses as the ground gagged beneath their feet. The Dharzi mounts were rearing and
snorting and the remaining dogs turned ner-vously to regard their masters with puzzled, uncer-tain eyes.
A low moan was coming from the lips of the living dead. Suddenly, a whole area of the sur-rounding
hillside split into cracks, and yawning crannies appeared in the surface. Elric and his com-panies swung
themselves on to their horse, as, with a frightful multi-voiced scream, the dead Lords were swallowed by
the earth, returning to the depths from which they had been summoned.
A deep unholy chuckle arose from the shattered pit. It was the mocking laughter of the Earth Kings
taking their rightful prey back into their keeping. Whining, the devil-dogs slunk towards the edge of the
pit, sniffing around it. Then, with one accord, the black pack hurled itself down into the chasm,
following its masters to whatever cold doom awaited them.
Moonglum shuddered. 'You are on familiar terms with the strangest people, friend Elric,' he said shak-ily
and turned his horse towards the mountains again.
They reached the black mountains on the follow-ing day and nervously Shaarilla led them along the
rocky route she had memorised. She no longer pleaded with Elric to return-she was resigned to whatever
fate awaited them. Elric's obsession was burning within him and he was filled with impa-tience-certain
that he would find, at last, the ulti-mate truth of existence in the Dead Gods' Book. Moonglum was
cheerfully skeptical, while Shaarilla was consumed with foreboding.
Rain still fell and the storm growled and crackled above them, And, as the driving rainfall increased with
fresh insistence, they came, at last, to the black, gaping mouth of a huge cave.
'I can lead you no further,' Shaarilla said wearily. 'The Book lies somewhere beyond, the entrance to this
cave.'
Elric and Moonglum looked uncertainly at one an-other, neither of them sure what move to make next.
To have reached their goal seemed somehow anticli-mactic-for nothing blocked the cave entrance-and
nothing appeared to guard it.
'It is inconceivable,' said Elric, 'that the dangers which beset us were not engineered by something, yet
here we are-and no one seeks to stop us enter-ing. Are you sure that this is the right cave, Shaarilla?' The
girl pointed upwards to the rock above the entrance. Engraved in it was a curious symbol which Elric
instantly recognised.
'The sigh of Chaos!' Elric exclaimed. 'Perhaps I should have guessed.'
'What does it mean, Elric?' Moonglum asked. 'That is the symbol of everlasting disruption and anarchy,'
Elric told him. 'We are standing in, terri-tory presided over by the Lords of Entropy or one of their
minions. So that is who our enemy is! This can only mean one thing-the Book is of extreme impor-tance
to the order of things on this plane-possibly all the myriad planes of the universe. It was why Arioch was
reluctant to aid me-he, too, is a Lord of Chaos!"
Moonglum stared at him in puzzlement. 'What do you mean, Elric?'
'Know you not that two forces govern the world-fighting an eternal battle?' Elric replied: 'Law and
Chaos. The upholders of Chaos state that in such a world as they rule, all things are possible. Opponents
of Chaos-those who ally themselves with the forces of Law-say that without Law nothing material is
possible.
"Some stand apart, believing that a balance be-tween the two is the proper state of things, but we cannot.
We have become embroiled in a dispute be-. tween the two forces. The Book is valuable to either
faction, obviously, and I could guess that the min-ions of Entropy are worried what power we might
release if we obtain this Book. Law and Chaos rarely interfere directly in Men's lives-that is why we
have not been fully aware of their presence. Now perhaps, I will discover at last the answer to the one
question which concerns me-does an ultimate force rule over the opposing factions of Law and Chaos?'
Elric stepped through the cave entrance, peering into the gloom while the others hesitantly followed him.
'The cave stretches back a long way. All we can do is press on until we find its far wall,' Elric said. 'Let's
hope that its far wall lies not downwards,' Moonglum said ironically as he motioned Elric to lead on.
They stumbled forward as the cave grew darker and darker. Their voices were magnified and hollow to
their own ears as the floor of the cave slanted sharply down. - 'This is no cave,' Elric
whispered, 'it's a tunnel- but I cannot guess where it leads.' " For several hours they pressed onwards
in pitch darkness, dinging to one another as they reeled for-ward, uncertain of their footing and still
aware that they were moving down a gradual incline. They lost all sense of time and Elric began to feel
as if he were living through a dream. Events seemed to have be,. come so unpredictable and beyond his
control that he could no longer cope with thinking about them in ordinary terms. The tunnel was long
and dark and wide and cold. It offered no comfort and the floor eventually became the only thing which
had any reality. It was firmly beneath his feet. He began to feel that possibly he was not moving-that the
floor, after all, was moving and he was remaining station-ary. His companions clung to him but he was
not aware of them. He was lost and his brain was numb. Sometimes he swayed and felt that he was on
the edge of a precipice. Sometimes he fell and his groan-ing body met hard stone, disproving the
proximity of the gulf down which he half-expected to fall. All the While he made his legs perform
walking motions, even though he was not at all sure whether he was actually moving forward. And time
meant nothing-became a meaningless concept with relation to nothing.
Until, at last, he was aware of a faint, blue glow ahead of him and he knew that he had been moving
forward. He began to run down the incline, but found that he was going too fast and had to check "his
speed. There was a scent of alien strangeness in the cool air of the cave tunnel and fear was a fluid force
which surged over him, something separate from himself.
The others obviously felt it, too, for though they said nothing, Elric could sense it. Slowly they moved 
downward, drawn like automatons towards the pale blue glow below them.
And then they were out of the tunnel, staring awestruck at the unearthly vision which confronted them.
Above them, the very air seemed of the strange blue colour which had originally attracted them. They
were standing on a jutting slab of rock and, although it was still somehow dark, the eerie blue glow
illuminated a stretch of glinting silver beach beneath them. And the beach was lapped by a surging dark
sea which moved restlessly like a liquid giant in disturbed slumber. Scattered along the sil-ver beach
were the dim shapes of wrecks-the bones of peculiarly designed boats, each of a different pat-tern from
the rest. The sea surged away into darkness and there was no horizon-only blackness. Behind them, they
could see a sheer cliff which was also lost in darkness beyond a certain point. And it was cold-bitterly
cold, with an unbelievable sharp-ness. For though the sea threshed beneath them, there was no dampness
in the air-no smell of salt. It was a bleak and awesome sight and, apart from the sea, they were the only
things that moved-the only things to make sound, for the sea was horribly silent in its restless movement.
'What now, Elric?' whispered Moonglum, shiver-ing.
Elric shook his head and they continued to stand there for a long time until the albino-his white face and
hands ghastly in the alien light said: 'Since it is impracticable to return-we shall venture over the sea' His
voice was hollow and he spoke as one who was unaware of his words.
Steps, cut into the living rock, led down towards the beach and now Elric began to descend them. The
others allowed him to lead them staring around them, their eyes lit by a terrible fascination.
FOUR
Their feet profaned the silence as they reached the silver beach of crystalline stones and crunched across
it. Elric's crimson eyes fixed upon one of the objects littering the beach and he smiled. He shook his head
savagely from side to side, as if to clear it. Trembling, he pointed to one of the boats, and the pair saw
that it was intact, unlike the others. It was yellow and red-vulgarly gay in this environment and nearing it
they observed that it was made of wood, yet unlike any wood they had seen. Moon-glum ran his stubby
fingers along its length. 'Hard as iron,' he breathed. 'No wonder it has not rotted as the Others have.' He
peered inside and shuddered. 'Well the owner won't argue if we take it,' he said wryly.
Elric and Shaarilla understood him when they saw the unnaturally twisted skeleton which lay at the
bottom of the boat. Elric reached inside and pulled the thing out, hurling it on to the stones. It rattled and
rolled over the gleaming shingle, disintegrating as it did so, scattering bones over a wide area. The skull
came to rest by the edge of the beach, seeming to stare sightlessly out over the disturbing ocean. As
Elric and Moonglum strove to push and pull the boat down the beach towards the sea, Shaarilla moved
ahead of them and squatted down, putting her hand into the wetness. She stood up sharply, shaking the
stuff from her hand.
'This is not water as I know it,' she said. They heard her, but said nothing.
'We'll need a sail,' Elric murmured. The cold breeze was moving out over the ocean. 'A cloak should
serve.' He stripped off his cloak and knotted it to the mast of the vessel. 'Two of us will have to hold this
at either edge,' he said. 'That way we'll have some slight control over the direction the boat takes. It's
makeshift-but the best we can manage.' They shoved off, taking care not to get their feet in the sea.
The wind caught the sail and pushed the boat out over the ocean; moving at a faster pace than Elric had
at first reckoned. The boat began to hurtle for-ward as if possessed of its own volition and Elric's and
Moonglum's muscles ached as they clung to the bottom ends of the sail.
Soon the silver beach was out of sight and they could see .little-the pale blue light above them scarcely
penetrating the blackness. It was then that they heard the dry flap of wings over their heads and looked
up.
Silently descending were three massive ape-like creatures, borne on great leathery wings. Shaarilla
recognised them and gasped.
"Clakars!"
Moonglum shrugged as he hurriedly drew his sword-'A name only-what are they?' But he re-ceived no
answer for the leading winged ape de-seemed with a rush, mouthing and gibbering, showing long fangs
in a slavering snout. Moonglum dropped his portion of the sail and slashed at the beast but it veered
away, its huge wings beating, and sailed upwards again.
Elric unsheathed Stormbringer-and was astound-ed. The blade remained silent, its Familiar howl of glee
muted. The blade shuddered in his hand and instead of the rush of power which usually flowed up his
arm, he felt only a slight tingling. He was panic-stricken for a moment-without the sword, he would soon
lose all vitality. Grimly fighting down his fear, he used the sword to protect himself from the rush-ing
attack of one of the winged apes. The ape gripped the blade, bowling Elric over, but it yelled in pain as
the blade cut through one knotted hand, Severing fingers which lay twitching and bloody on the narrow
deck. Elric gripped the side of the boat and hauled himself upright once more. Shrilling its agony, the
winged ape attacked again, but this time with more caution. Elric sum-moned all his strength and swung
the heavy sword in a two-handed grip, ripping off one of the leathery wings so that the mutilated beast
flopped about the deck. Judging the place where its heart should be, Elric drove the blade in under the
breast-bone. The ape's movements subsided.
Moonglum was lashing wildly at two of the winged apes which were attacking him from both sides. He
was-down on one knee, vainly hacking at random. He had opened up the whole side of a beast's head
but, though in pain, it still came at him. Elric hurled Stormbringer through the darkness and it struck the
wounded beast in the throat, point first. The ape clutched with clawing fingers at the steel and fell
overboard. Its corpse floated on the liquid but slowly began to sink. Elric grabbed with frantic fingers at
the hilt of his sword, reaching far over the side of the boat. Incredibly, the blade was sinking with the
beast. Knowing Stormbringer's properties as he did, Elric was amazed-once when he had hurled the
runesword into the ocean, it had refused to sink. Now it was being dragged beneath the surface as any
ordinary blade would bedraggled. He gripped the hilt and hauled the sword out of the winged ape's
carcass.
His strength was seeping swiftly from him. It was incredible. What alien laws governed this cavern
world? He could not guess-and all he was concerned with was regaining his waning strength. Without
the runesword's power, this was impossible! Moonglum's curved blade had disemboweled the remaining
beast and the little man was busily tossing the dead thing over the side. He turned, grinning triumphantly,
to Elric.
'A good fight,' he said.
Elric shook his head. 'We must cross this sea speedily,' he replied, 'else we're lost-finished. My power is
gone' 'How? Why?'
'I know not-unless the forces of Entropy rule more strongly here. Make haste-there is no time for
speculation.'
Moonglum's eyes were disturbed. He could do nothing but act as Elric said.
Elric was trembling in his Weakness, holding the billowing sail with draining strength. Shaarilla moved
to help him, her thin hands close to his; her deep-set eyes bright with sympathy. 'What were those
things?' Moonglum gasped, his teeth naked and white beneath his back-drawn lips, his breath coming
short.
'Clakars,' Shaarilla replied. 'They are the primeval ancestors of my people, older in origin than recorded
time. My people are thought the oldest inhabitants of this planet.'
'Whoever seeks to stop us in this quest of yours had best find some-original means.' Moonglum grinned.
'The old methods don't work.' But the other two did not smile, for Elric was half-fainting and the woman
was concerned only with his plight. Moonglum shrugged, staring ahead.
When he spoke .again, sometime later, his voice was excited. 'We're nearing land/' Land it was, and they
were traveling fast, towards it. Too fast. Elric heaved himself uptight and spoke heavily and with
difficulty. 'Drop the sail!' Moon-glum obeyed him. The boat sped on, struck another stretch of silver
beach and ground up it, the prow ploughing a dark scar through the glinting shingle. It stopped 
suddenly, tilting violently to one side so that the three were tumbled against the boat's rail. Shaarilla and
Moonglum pulled themselves up-right and dragged the limp and nerveless albino on to the beach.
Carrying him between them, they struggled up the beach until the crystalline shingle gave way to thick,
fluffy moss, padding their foot-falls. They laid the albino down and stared at him worriedly, uncertain of
their next actions. Elric strained to rise, but was unable to do so. 'Give me time,' he gasped. 'I Won't diebut
already my eyesight is fading. I can only hope that the blade's power will return on dry land.' With a
mighty effort, he pulled Stormbringer from its scabbard and he smiled in relief as the evil runesword
moaned faintly and then, slowly, its song increased in power as black flame flickered along its length.
Already the power was flowing into Elric's body, giving him renewed vitality. But even as strength
returned, Elric's crimson eyes flared with terrible misery.
'Without this black blade,' he groaned, 'I am noth-ing, as you see. But what is it making of me? Am I to
be bound to it for ever?'
The others did not answer him and they were both moved by an emotion they could not define-an
emotion blended of fear, hate and pity-linked with something else ...
Eventually, Elric rose, trembling, and silently led them up the mossy hillside towards a more natural
light which filtered from above. They could see that it came from a wide chimney, leading apparently to
the upper air. By means of the light, they could soon make out a dark, irregular shape which towered in
the shadow of the gap.
As they neared the shape, they saw that it was a castle of black stone-a sprawling pile covered with dark
green crawling lichen which curled over its an-cient bulk with an almost sentient protectiveness. Towers
appeared to spring at random from it and it covered a vast area. There seemed to be no windows in any
part of it and the only orifice was a rearing doorway blocked by thick bars of a metal which glowed with
dull redness, but without heat. Above this gate, in flaring amber, was the sign of the Lords of Entropy,
representing eight arrows radiating from a central hub in all directions. It appeared to hang in the air
without touching the black, Lichen-covered stone.
'I think our quest ends here,' Elric said grimly.
'Here, or nowhere.'
'Before I go further, Elric, I'd like to know what it is you seek,' Moonglum murmured. 'I think I've earned
the right.'
'A book,' Elric said carelessly. 'The Dead Gods' Book. It lies within those castle walls-of that I'm certain.
We have reached the end of our journey.' Moonglum shrugged. 'I might not have asked,' he smiled, 'for
all your words mean to me. I hope that I will be allowed some small share of whatever treasure it
represents.'
Elric ginned, in spite of the coldness which gripped his bowels, but he did not answer Moon-glum 'We
need to enter the castle, first,' he said instead. As if the gates had heard him, the metal bars flared to a
pale green and then their glow faded back to red and finally dulled into non-existence. The en-trance was
unbarred and their way apparently clear. 'I like not that," growled Moonglum. 'Too easy. A trap awaits
us-are we to spring it at the pleasure of whoever dwells within the castle confines?' 'What else can we
do?' Elric spoke quietly. 'Go back-or forward. Avoid the castle-do not tempt He who guards the Book!'
Shaarilla was grip-ping the albino's right arm, her whole face moving with fear, her eyes pleading.
'Forget the Book, Elric!' 'Now?" Elric laughed humourlessly. 'Now-after this journey? No, Shaarilla, not
when the truth is so close. Better to die than never to have tried to secure the wisdom in the Book when it
lies so near.' Shaarilla's clutching fingers relaxed their grip and her shoulders slumped in hopelessness.
'We cannot do battle with the minions of Entropy...' 'Perhaps we will not have to.' Elric did not believe
his own words but his mouth was twisted with some dark emotion, intense and terrible. Moonglum
glanced at Shaarilla.
'Shaarilla is right,' he said with conviction. 'You'll find nothing but bitterness, possibly death, inside
those castle walls. Let us, instead, climb yonder steps and attempt to reach the surface.' He pointed to
some twisting steps which led towards the yawning rent in the cavern roof.
Elric shook his head. 'No. You go if you like.' Moonglum grimaced in perplexity. 'You're a stub-born
one, friend Elric. Well, if it's all or nothing- then I'm with you. But personally, I have always pre-ferred
compromise.'
Elric began to walk slowly forward towards the dark entrance of the bleak and towering castle. In a
wide, shadowy courtyard a tall figure, wreathed in scarlet fire, stood awaiting them. Elric marched on,
passing the gateway. Moonglum and Shaarilla nervously followed.
Gusty laughter roared from the mouth of the giant and the scarlet fire fluttered about him. He was naked
and unarmed, but the power which flowed from him almost forced the three back. His skin was scaly and
of smoky purple colouring. His massive body was alive with rippling muscle as he rested lightly on the
balls of his feet. His skull was long, slanting sharply backwards at the forehead and his eyes were like
slivers of blue steel, showing no pupil. His whole body shook with mighty, malicious joy.
"Greetings to you, Lord Elric of Melnibone-I con-gratulate you for your remarkable tenacity?' 'Who are
you?' Elric growled, his hand on his sword.
"My name is Orunlu the Keeper and this is a stronghold of the Lords of Entropy." The giant smiled
cynically. "You need not finger your puny blade so nervously, ]or you should know that 1 can-not harm
you now. I gained power to remain in your realm only by making that vow." Elric's voice betrayed his
mounting excitement.-'You cannot stop us?'
"I do not dare to-since my oblique efforts have failed. But your foolish endeavours perplex me
somewhat, I'll admit. The Book is of importance to us--.but what can it mean to you? I have guarded it
for three hundred centuries and have never been curious enough to seek to discover why my Masters
place so much importance upon it-why they both-ered to rescue it on its sunward course and incarcer-ate
it on this boring ball of earth populated by the capering, briefly-lived clowns called Men?"
'I seek in it the Truth,' Elric said guardedly. - "There is no Truth but that of Eternal struggle,' the scarletflamed
giant said with conviction;
'What rules above the forces of Law and Chaos?'
Elric asked. 'What controls your destinies as it controls
mine?' " '
The giant frowned. "
"That question, I cannot answer. I do not know, There is only the Balance."
'Then perhaps the Book will tell us who holds it.' Elric said purposefully. 'Let me pass-tell me where it
lies.'
The giant moved back, smiling ironically. "It lies in a small chamber in the central tower. I have sworn
never to venture there, otherwise I might even lead the way. Go if you like-my duty is over." Elric,
Moonglum and Shaarilla stepped towards the entrance of the castle, but before they entered, the giant
spoke warningly from behind them. 'I have been told that the knowledge contained in the Book could
swing the balance on the side of the forces of Law. This disturbs me-but, it appears, there is another
possibility which disturbs me even more.'
'What is that?' Elric said.
"It could create such a tremendous impact on the multiverse that complete entropy would result. My
Masters do not desire that, for it could mean the destruction of all matter in the end. We exist only to
fight-not to win, but to preserve the eternal struggle.'
'I care not,' Elric told him. 'I have little to lose, Orunlu the Keeper.'
"Then go." The giant strode across the courtyard into blackness.
Inside the tower, light of a pale quality illumi-nated winding steps leading upwards. Elric began to climb
them in silence, moved by his own doom-filled purpose. Hesitantly, Moonglum and Shaarilla fob lowed
in his path, their faces set in hopeless accept-ante.
On and upward the steps mounted, twisting tortu-ously towards their goal, until at last they came to the
chamber, full of blinding light, many-coloured and scintillating, which did not penetrate outwards at allbut
remained confined to the room which housed it.
Blinking, shielding his red eyes with his arm, Elric pressed forward and, through slitted pupils saw the
source of the light lying on a small stone dais in the centre of the room.
Equally troubled by the bright light, Shaarilla and Moonglum followed him into the room and stood in
awe at what they saw.
It was a huge book-the Dead Gods' Book, its cov-ers encrusted with alien gems from which the light
sprang. It gleamed, it throbbed with light and bril-liant colour.
'At last,' Elric breathed, 'At last-the Truth!' He stumbled forward like a man made stupid with drink, his
pale hands reaching for the thing he had sought with such savage bitterness. His hands touched the
pulsating cover of the Book and, trem-bling, turned it back.
'Now, I shall learn,' he said, half-gloatingly. With a crash, the cover fell to the floor, sending the brightgems
skipping and dancing over the pav-ing stones.
Beneath Elric's twitching hands lay nothing but a pile of yellowish dust.
'No!' His scream was anguished, unbelieving. 'No!' Tears flowed down his contorted face as he ran his
hands through the fine dust. With a groan which racked his whole being, he fell forward, his face hitting
the disintegrated parchment, Time had destroyed the Book-untouched, possibly forgotten, for three
hundred centuries. Even the wise and pow-erful Gods who had created it had perished-and now its
knowledge followed them into oblivion. They stood on the slopes of the high mountain, staring down
into the green valleys below them. The sun shone and the sky was clear and blue. Behind them lay the
gaping hole which led into the strong-hold of the Lords of Entropy.
Elric looked with sad eyes across the world and his head was lowered beneath a weight of weariness and
dark despair. He had not spoken since his compan-ions had dragged him sobbing from the chamber of
the Book. Now he raised his pale face and spoke in a voice tinged with self-mockery, sharp with bitterness-a
lonely voice: the calling of hungry seabirds circling cold skies above bleak shores. 'Now,' he said,
'I will live my life without ever knowing why I live it-whether it has purpose or not. Perhaps the Book
could have told me. But would I have believed it, even then? I am the eter-nal sceptic---never sure that
my actions are my own; never certain that-an ultimate entity is not guiding me.
'I envy those who know. All I can do now is to con-tinue my quest and hope, without hope, that before
my span is ended, the truth will be presented to me.' Shaarilla took his limp hands in hers and her eyes
were wet.
'Elric-let me comfort you.'
The albino sneered bitterly. 'Would that we'd never met, Shaarilla of the Dancing Mist. For a while, you
gave me hope-I had thought to be at last at peace with myself. But, because of you. I am left more
hopeless than before. There is no salvation in this world-only malevolent doom. Goodbye.' He took his
hands away from her grasp and set off down the mountainside.
Moonglum darted a glance at Shaarilla and then at Elric. He took something from his purse and put it in
the girl's hand.
'Good luck,' he said, and then he was running af-ter Elric until he caught him up.
Still striding, Elric turned at Moonglum's ap-proach and, despite his brooding misery said: 'What is it,
friend Moonglum? Why do you follow me?' I've followed you thus far, Master Elric, and I see no reason
to stop,' grinned the little man. 'Besides, unlike yourself, I'm a materialist. We'll need to eat, you know.'
Elric frowned, feeling a warmth growing within him. 'What do you mean, Moonglum?'
Moonglum chuckled. 'I take advantage of situa-tions of any kind, where I may,' he answered. He reached
into his purse and displayed something on his outstretched hand which shone with a dazzling brilliancy.
It was one of the jewels from the cover of the Book. 'There are more in my purse,' he said, 'And each one
worth a fortune.' He took Elric's arm. 'Come, Elric-what new lands shall we visit so that we may change
these baubles into wine and pleasant company?'
Behind them, standing stock still on the hillside, Shaarilla stared miserably after them until they were no
longer visible. The jewel Moonglum had given her dropped from her fingers and fell, bouncing and
bright, until it was lost amongst the heather. Then she turned-and the dark mouth of the cavern yawned 
before her.
Book Three
THE SINGING CITADEL
In which Elric has his first dealings with Pan Tang, Yishana of Jharkor, the sorcerer The-leb K'aarna,
and learns something more of the Higher Worlds...
ONE
The turquoise sea was peaceful in the golden light of early evening, and the two men at the rail of the
ship stood in silence, looking north to the misty hori-zon. One was tall and slim, wrapped in a heavy
black cloak, its cowl flung back to reveal his long, milk-white hair; the other was short and red-headed.
'She was a fine woman and she loved you,' said the short man at length. 'Why did you leave her so
abruptly?'
'She was a fine woman,' the tall one replied, 'but she would have loved me to her cost. Let her seek her
own land and stay there. I have already slain one woman whom I loved, Moonglum. I would not slay
another.'
Moonglum shrugged. 'I sometimes wonder, Elric, if this grim destiny of yours is the figment of your own
guilt-ridden mood.'
'Perhaps,' Elric replied carelessly. 'But I do not care to test the theory. Let's speak no more of this.' The
sea foamed and rushed by as the oars disrupt-ed the surface, driving the ship swiftly towards the port of
Dhakos, capital of Jharkor, one of the most powerful of the Young Kingdoms. Less than two years
previously Jharkor's king, Darmit, had died in the ill-fated raid on Imrryr, and Elric had heard that the
men of Jharkor blamed him for the young king's death, though this was not the case. He cared little
whether they blamed him or not, for he was still dis-dainful of the greater part of mankind. 'Another
hour will see nightfall, and it's unlikely we'll sail at night,' Moonglum said. 'I'm to bed, I think.'
Elric was about to reply when he was interrupted by a high-pitched shout from the crows nest. "Sail on
larboard stern!"
The lookout must have been half asleep, for the ship bearing down on them could easily be made out
from the deck. Elric stepped aside as the captain, a dark-faced Tarkeshite, came running along the deck.
'What's the ship, captain?' called Moonglum. 'A Pan Tang trireme-a warship. They're on ram-ming
course.' The captain ran on, yelling orders to the helm to turn the ship aside.
Elric and Moonglum crossed the deck to see the trireme better. She was a black-sailed ship, painted
black and heavily gilded, with three rowers to an oar as against their two. She was big and yet elegant,
with a high curving stern and a low prow. Now they could see the waters broken by her big, brasssheathed
ram. She had two lateen-rigged sails, and the wind was in her favour.
The rowers were in a panic as they sweated to turn the ship according to the helmsman's orders. Oars
rose and fell in confusion and Moonglum turned to Elric with a half-smile.
'They'll never do it. Best ready your blade, friend.'
Pan Tang was an isle of sorcerers, fully human, who sought to emulate the old power of Melnibone.
Their fleets were among the best in the Young King-doms and raided with little discrimination. The
Theocrat of Pan Tang, chief of the priest-aristoc-racy, was Jagreen Lern, who was reputed to have a pact
with the powers of Chaos and a plan to rule the world.
Elric regarded the men of Pan Tang as upstarts Who could never hope to mirror the glory of his ancestors,
but even he had to admit that this ship was impressive and would easily win a fight with the
Tarkeshite galley.
Soon the great trireme was bearing down on them and captain and helmsman fell silent as they realised
they could not evade the ram. With a harsh sound of crushed timbers, the ram connected with the stern, 
holing the galley beneath the waterline. Elric stood immobile, watching as the trireme's grappling irons
hurtled towards their galley's deck. Somewhat half-heartedly, knowing they were no match for the welltrained
and well-armoured Pan Tang crew, the Tarkeshites ran towards the stern, preparing to resist the
boarders.
Moonglum cried urgently: 'Elric-we must help!' Reluctantly Elric nodded. He was loathe to draw the
runesword from its scabbard at his side. Of late its power seemed to have increased.
Now the scarlet-armoured warriors were swinging towards where the Tarkeshites waited. The first wave,
armed with broadswords and battle-axes, hit the sailors, driving them back.
Now Elric's hand fell to the hilt of Stormbringer. As he gripped it and drew it, the blade gave an odd,
disturbing moan, as if of anticipation, and a weird black radiance flickered along its length. Now it
throbbed in Elric's hand like something alive as the albino ran forward to aid the Tarkeshite sailors.
Already half the defenders had been hewed down and as the rest retreated, Elric, with Moonglum at his
heels, moved forward. The scarlet-armoured war-riors' expressions changed from grim triumph to
startlement as Elric's great black-blade shrieked up and down and clove through a man's armour from
shoulder to lower ribs.
Evidently they recognized him and the sword, for both were legendary. Though Moonglum was a skilled
swordsman, they all but ignored him as they realised that they must concentrate all their strength on
bringing Elric down if they were to survive. The old, wild killing-lust of his ancestors now dominated
Elric as the blade reaped souls. He and the sword became one and it was the sword, not El-ric, that was
in control. Men fell on all sides, scream-ing more in horror than in pain as they realised what the sword
had drawn from them. Four came at him with axes whistling. He sliced off one's head, cut a deep gash in
another's midriff, lopped off an arm, and drove the blade point first into the heart of the last. Now the
Tarkeshites were cheering, following after Elric and Moonglum as they cleared the sink-hag galley's
decks of attackers. "
Howling like a wolf, Elric grabbed a" rope-part of the black and gold trireme's rigging-and swung towards
the enemy's decks.
'Follow him!' Moonglum yelled. 'This is our, only chance-this ship's doomed!'
The trireme had raised decks fore and aft. On the foredeck stood the captain, splendid in scarlet and blue,
his face aghast at this turn of events. He had expected to get his prize effortlessly, now it seemed he was
to be the prize!
Stormbringer sang a wailing song as Elric pressed towards the foredeck, a song that was at once triumphant
and ecstatic. The remaining warriors no longer rushed at him, and concentrated on Moon-glum,
who was leading the Tarkeshite crew, leaving Elric's path to the captain clear.
The captain, a member of the theocracy, would be harder to vanquish than his men. As Elric moved
towards him, he noted that the man's armour had a peculiar glow to it-it had been sorcerously treated.
The captain was typical of his kind-stocky, heav-ily-bearded, with malicious black eyes over a strong,
hooked nose. His lips were thick and red and he was smiling a little as, with axe in one hand and sword
in the other, he prepared to meet Elric, who was running up the steps.
Elric gripped Stormbringer in both hands and lunged for the captain's stomach, but the man stepped
sideways and parried with his sword, swing-ing the axe left-handed at Elric's unprotected head. The
albino had to sway to one side, staggered, and fell to the deck, rolling as the broadsword thudded into the
deck, just missing his shoulder. Stormbringer seemed to-rise of its own accord to block a further axe
blow and then chopped upwards to sheer off the head near the handle. The captain cursed and discarded
the handle, gripped his broadsword in both hands and raised it. Again Stormbringer acted a fraction
sooner than Eric's own reactions. He drove the blade up towards the man's heart. The magic treated
armour stopped it for a second; but then Storm-bringer shrilled a chilling, wailing song, shuddered as if
summoning more strength, slipped on the armour again. And then the magic armour split like a nutshell,
leaving Elric's opponent bare-chested, his arms still raised for the strike. His eyes widened. He backed
away, his sword forgotten, his gaze fixed on the evil runeblade as it struck him under the breast-bone and 
drove in. He grimaced, whimpered, and dropped his sword, clutching instead at the blade, which was
sucking out his soul.
'By Chardros-not-not-aahhh!'
He died knowing that even his soul was not safe from the hell-blade borne by the wolf-faced albino.
Elric wrenched Stormbringer from the. corpse, feeling his own vitality increase as the sword passed on
its stolen energy: refusing to consider the knowledge that he needed the sword the more he used it.
On the deck of the trireme, only the galley-slaves were left alive. But the deck was tilting badly, for the
trireme's ram and grapples still tied it to the sinking Tarkeshite ship.
'Cut the grappling ropes and back water-quickly!' Elric yelled. Sailors, realising what was happening,
leapt forward to do as he ordered. The slaves backed water, and the ram came out: with a groan of split
wood. The grapples were cut and the doomed galley set adrift.
Elric counted the survivors. Less than half the crew were alive, and their captain .had died in the first
onslaught. He addressed the slaves. 'If you'd have your freedom, row well towards Dhakos,' he called.
The sun was setting, but now that he was in command he decided to sail through the night by the stars.
Moonglum shouted incredulously: 'Why offer them their freedom? We could sell them in Dhakos and
thus be paid for today's exertion!' Elric shrugged. 'I offer them freedom because I choose to, Moonglum.'
The redhead sighed and turned to supervise the throwing of the dead and wounded overboard. He would
never understand the albino, he decided. It was probably for the best.
And that was how Elric came to enter Dhakos in some style, when he had originally intended to slip into
the city without being recognised. Leaving Moonglum to negotiate the sale of the trireme and divide the
money between the crew and himself, Elric drew his hood over his head and pushed through the crowd
which had collected, mak-ing for an inn he knew of by the west gate of the city.
Two
Later that night, when Moonglum had gone to bed, Elric sat in the tavern room drinking. Even the most
enthusiastic of the night's roisterers had left when they had noticed with whom they shared the room; and
now Elric sat alone, the only light coming from a guttering reed torch over the outside door, Now the
door opened and a richly-dressed youth stood there, staring in.
'I seek the White Wolf,' he said, his head at a questioning angle. He could not see Elric clearly. 'I'm
sometimes called that name in these parts,' El-tic said calmly. 'Do you seek Elric of Melnibone?' 'Aye. I
have a message.' The youth came in, keep-ing his cloak wrapped about him, for the room was cold
though Elric did not notice it. 'I am Count Yolan, deputy-commander of the city guard,' the youth said
arrogantly, coming up to the table at which Elric sat and studying the albino rudely. 'You are brave to
come here so openly. Do you think the folk of Jharkor have such short memories they can forget that you
led their king into a trap scarce two years since?' Elric sipped his wine, then said from behind the rim of
his cup: 'This is rhetoric, Count Yolan. What is your message?'
Yolan's assured manner left him; he made a rather weak gesture. 'Rhetoric to you, perhaps-but I for one
feel strongly on the matter. Would not King Darmit be here today if you had not fled from the battle that
broke the power of the Sea Lords and your own folk? Did you not use your sorcery to aid you in your
flight, instead of using it to aid the men who thought they were your comrades?' _ Elric sighed. 'I know
your purpose here was not to bait me in this manner. Darmit died on board his flagship during the first
attack on Imrryr's sea-maze, not in the subsequent battle.'
'You sneer at my questions and then proffer lame lies to cover your own cowardly deed,' Yolan said
bitterly. 'If I had my way you'd be fed to your hell-blade there-I've heard what happened earlier.' Elric
rose slowly. 'Your taunts tire me. When you feel ready to deliver your message, give it to the inn-keeper.'
He walked around the table, moving towards the stairs, but stopped as Yolan turned and plucked at his
sleeve.
Elric's corpse-white face stared down at the young noble. His crimson eyes flickered with a dangerous
emotion. 'I am not used to such familiarity, young man.'
Yolan's hand fell away. 'Forgive me. I was self-in-dulgent and should not have let my emotions over-ride
diplomacy. I came on a matter of discretion-a message from Queen Yishana. She seeks your help.' 'I'm as
disinclined to help others as I am to ex-plain my actions,' Elric spoke impatiently. 'In the past my help
has not always been to the advantage of those who've sought it. Darmit, your queen's half-brother;
discovered that.'
Yolan said sullenly: 'You echo my own warnings to the queen, sir. For all that, she desires to see you in
private-tonight...' he scowled and looked away. 'I would point out that I could have you arrested should
you refuse.'
'Perhaps.' Elric moved again towards the steps. 'Tell Yishana that I stay the night here and move on at
dawn. She may visit me if her request is so ur-gent.' He climbed the stairs, leaving a gape-mouthed
Yolan sitting alone in the quiet of the tavern. Theleb K'aarna scowled. For all his skill in the black arts,
he was a fool in love; and Yishana, sprawled on her fur-rich bed, knew it. It pleased her to have power
over a man who could destroy her with a simple incantation if it were not for his love. weakness.
Though Theleb K'aarna stood high in the hierarchy of Pan Tang, it was clear to her that she was in no
danger from the sorcerer. Indeed, her in-tuition informed her that this man who loved to dominate others
also needed to be dominated. She filled this need for him-with relish. Theleb K'aarna continued to scowl
at her. 'How can that decadent spell-singer help you where I can-not?' he muttered, sitting down on the
bed and stroking her bejewelled foot.
Yishana was pot a young woman, neither was she pretty. Yet there was an hypnotic quality about her
tall, full body, her lush black hair, and her wholly sensuous face. Few of the men she had singled out for
her pleasure had been able to resist her. Neither was she sweet-natured, just, wise, nor self-sacrificing.
The historians would append no noble soubriquet to her name. Still, there was some-thing so selfsufficient
about her, something denying the usual standards by which a person was judged, that all who
knew her admired her, and she was well-loved by those she ruled-loved rather as a wil-ful child is loved,
yet loved with firm loyalty. Now she laughed quietly, mockingly at her sorcerer lover.
'You're probably right, Theleb K'aarna, but Elric is a legend-the most spoken-of, least-known man in the
world. This is my opportunity to discover what others have only speculated on-his true character.' Theleb
K'aarna made a pettish gesture. He stroked his long black beard and got up, walking to a table bearing
fruit and wine. He poured wine for them both. 'if you seek to make me jealous again, you are succeeding,
of course. I hold little hope for your ambition. Elric's ancestors were half-demons- his race is not human
and cannot be judged by our yardsticks. To us, sorcery is learned after years of study and sacrifice-to
Elric's kind, sorcery is intui-tive-natural, You may not live to learn his secrets. Cymoril, his beloved
cousin, died on his blade-and she was his betrothed!'
'Your concern is touching.' She lazily accepted the goblet he handed to her. 'But I'll continue with my
plan, none the less. After all, you can hardly claim to have had much success in discovering the nature of
this citadel!'
'There are subtleties I have not properly plumbed as yet!'
'Then perhaps Elric's intuition will provide an-swers where you fail,' she smiled. Then he got up and
looked through the window at the sky where the full moon hung in a clear sky over the spires of Dhakos.
'Yolan is late. If-all went properly, he should have brought Elric here by now.' 'Yolan was a mistake,
You should not have sent such a close friend of Darmit's. For all we know, he's challenged Elric and
killed him!'
Again she couldn't resist laughter. 'Oh, you wish too hard-it clouds your reason. I sent Yolan because I
knew he would be rude to the albino and perhaps weaken his usual insouciance-arouse his curiosity.
Yolan was a kind of bait to bring Elric to us!'
'Then possibly Elric sensed this?'
'I am not overly intelligent, my love-but I think my instincts rarely betray, me. We shall see soon.' A 
little later there was a discreet scratch at the door and a handmaiden entered.
'Your Highness, Count Yolan has returned.' 'Only Count Yolan?' There was a smile on Theleb K'aarna's
face. It was to disappear in a short while as Yishana left the room, garbed for the street. 'You are a fool!'
he snarled as the door slammed. He flung down his goblet. Already he had been un-successful in the
matter of the citadel and, if Elric displaced him, he could lose everything. He began to think very
deeply,' very carefully.
THREE
Though he claimed lack of conscience, Elric's tor-mented eyes belied the claim as he sat at his win-dow,
drinking strong wine and thinking on the past. Since the sack of Imrryr, he had quested the world,
seeking some purpose to his existence, some meaning to his life.
He had failed to find the answer in the Dead God's Book. He had failed to love Shaarilla, the wingless
woman of Myyrrhn, failed to forget Cymoril, who still inhabited his nightmares. And there were
memories of other dreams-of a fate he dare not think upon.
Peace, he thought, was all he sought. Yet even peace in death was denied him. It was in this mood that
he continued to brood until his reverie was bro-ken by a soft scratching at the door. Immediately his
expression hardened. His crimson eyes took on a guarded look, his shoulders lifted so that when he stood
up he was all cool arrogance. He placed the cup on the table and said lightly:
'Enter!'
A woman entered, swathed in a dark red cloak, unrecognizable in the gloom of the room. She closed the
door behind her and stood there, motionless and unspeaking.
When at length she spoke, her voice was almost hesitant, though there was some irony in it, too. 'You sit
in darkness, Lord Elric, I had thought to find you asleep ...'
'Sleep, madam, is the occupation that bores me most. But I will light a torch if you find the darkness
unattractive.' He went to the table and removed the cover from the small bowl of charcoal which lay
there. He reached for a thin wooden spill and placed one end in the bowl, blowing gently. Soon the charcoal
glowed, and the taper caught, and he touched it to a reed torch that hung in a bracket on the wall
above the table.
The torch flared and sent shadows skipping around the small chamber. The woman drew back her cowl
and the light caught her dark, heavy fea-tures and the masses of black hair which framed them. She
contrasted strongly with the slender, aes-thetic albino who stood a head taller, looking at her
impassively.
She was unused to impassive looks and the novelty pleased her.
'You sent for me, Lord Elric-and you see I am here.' She made a mock curtsey.
'Queen Yishana,' he acknowledged the curtsey with a slight bow. Now that she confronted him, she
sensed his power-a power that perhaps attracted even more strongly than her own. And yet, he gave no
hint that he responded to her. She reflected that a situation she had expected to be interesting might,
ironically, become frustrating. Even this amused her. Elric, in turn, was intrigued by this woman in spite
of himself. His jaded emotions "hinted that Yishana might restore their edge. This excited him and
perturbed him at once.
He relaxed a little and shrugged. 'I have heard of you, Queen Yishana, in other lands than Jharkor. Sit
down if you wish.' He indicated a bench and seated himself on the edge of the bed.
'You are more courteous than your summons sug-gested,' she smiled as she sat down, crossed her legs,
and folded her arms in front of her. 'Does this mean that you will listen to a proposition I have?' He
smiled back. It was a rare smile for him, a little grim, but without the usual bitterness. 'I think so. You
are an unusual woman, Queen Yishana. Indeed, I would suspect that you had Melnibonean blood if I did
not know better.'
'Not all your Young Kingdom "upstarts" are quite as unsophisticated as you believe, my lord.' 'Perhaps.'
'Now that I see you at last, face to face, I find your dark legend a little hard to credit in parts-and yet, on
the other hand,' she put her head on one side and regarded him frankly, 'it would seem that the legends
speak of a less subtle man than the one I see before me.'
'That is the way with legends."
'Ah,' she half-whispered, 'what a force we could be together, you and I...'
'Speculation of that sort irritates me, Queen Yishana. What is your purpose in coming here?' 'Very _well,
I did not expect you to listen, even.'
'I'll listen-but expect nothing more.' 'Then listen. I think the story will be appreciated, even by you.'
Elric listened and, as Yishana had suspected, the-tale she told began to catch his interest... Several
months ago, Yishana told Elric, peasants in the Gharavian province of Jharkor began to talk of some
mysterious riders who were carrying off young men and women from the villages.
Suspecting bandits, Yishana had sent a detachment of her White Leopards, Jharkor's finest fighting men,
to the province to put down the brigands. None of the White Leopards had returned. A sec-ond
expedition had found no trace of them but, in a valley close to the town of Thokora, they had come upon
a strange citadel. Descriptions of the citadel were confused. Suspecting that the White Leopards had
attacked and been defeated, the officer in charge had used discretion, left a few men to watch the cita-del
and report anything they saw, and returned at once to Dhakos. One thing was certain-the citadel had not
been in the valley a few months before. Yishana and Theleb K'aarna had led a large force to the valley.
The men left behind had disappeared but, as soon as he saw the citadel, Theleb K'aarna had warned
Yishana not to attack. ' 'It was a marvellous sight, Lord Elric,' Yishana continued. 'The citadel
scintillated with shining, rainbow colours-colours that were constantly alter-hag, changing. The whole
building looked unreal- sometimes it stood out sharply: sometimes it seemed misty, as if about to vanish.
Theleb K'aarna said its nature was sorcerous, and we did not doubt him. Something from the Realm of
Chaos, he said, and that seemed likely.' She got up.
She spread her hands. 'We are not used to large-scale manifestations of sorcery in these parts. Theleb
K'aarna was familiar enough with sorcery-he comes from the City of Screaming Statues on Pan Tang,
and such things are seen frequently-but even he was taken aback.'
'So you withdrew,' Elric promoted impatiently. 'We were about to-in fact Theleb K'aarna and myself
were already riding back at the head of the army when the music came... It was sweet, beauti-ful,
unearthly, painful-Theleb K'aarna shouted to me to ride as swiftly as I could away from it. I dab lied,
attracted by the music, but he slapped the rump of my horse and we rode, fast as dragons in flight, away
from there. Those nearest us also es-caped-but we saw the rest turn and move back towards the citadel,
drawn by the music. Nearly two hundred men went back-and vanished.' 'What did you do then?' Elric
asked as Yishana crossed the floor and sat down-beside him. He moved to give her more room.
'Theleb K'aarna has been trying to investigate the nature of the citadel-its purpose and its controller. So
far, his divinations have told him little more than he guessed: that the Realm of Chaos has sent the citadel
to the Realm of Earth and is slowly extending its range. More and more of our young men and
women are being abducted by the minions of Chaos.' 'And these minions?' Yishana had moved a little
closer, and this time Elric did not move away, 'None who has sought to stop them has succeeded- few
have lived.'
'And what do you seek of me?"
'Help.' She looked closely into his face and reached out a hand to touch him. 'You have knowledge of
both Chaos and Law-old knowledge, instinctive knowledge if Theleb K'aarna is right. Why, your very
Gods are Lords of Chaos.' 'That is exactly true, Yishana-and because our pa-tron Gods are of Chaos, it is
not in my interest to fight against any one of them.'
Now he moved towards her and he was smiling, looking into her eyes. Suddenly, he took her in his am.
'Perhaps you will be strong enough,' he said enigmatically, just before their lips met. 'And as for the
other matter-we can discuss that later.' In the deep greenness of a dark mirror, Theleb K'aarna saw
something of the scene in Elric's room and he glowered impotently. He tugged at his beard as the scene 
faded for the tenth time in a minute. None of his mutterings could restore it. He sat back in his chair of
serpent skulls and planned vengeance. That vengeance could take time maturing, he de-tided; for, if
Elric could be useful in the matter of the citadel, there was no point in destroying him yet ....
FOUR
Next afternoon, three riders set off for the town of Thokora. Elric and Yishana rode close together; but
the third rider, Theleb K'aarna, kept a frowning dis-tance. If Elric was at all embarrassed by this display
on the part of the man he had ousted in Yishana's af-fections, he did not show it.
Elric, finding Yishana more than attractive in spite of himself, had agreed at least to inspect the citadel
and suggest what it might be and how it might be fought. He had exchanged a few words with Moonglum
before setting off.
They rode across the beautiful grasslands of Jharkor, golden beneath a hot sun. It was two days' ride to
Thokora, and Elric intended to enjoy it. Feeling less than miserable, he galloped along with Yishana,
laughing with her in her enjoyment. Yet, buried deeper than it would normally have been, there was a
deep foreboding in his heart as they neared the mysterious citadel, and he noted that Theleb K'aarna
occasionally looked satisfied when he should have looked disgruntled. Sometimes Elric would shout to
the sorcerer. 'Ho, old spell-maker, do you feel no joyful release from the cares of the court out here
amidst the beauties of nature? Your face is long, Theleb K'aarna-breathe in the untainted air and laugh
with us!' Then The-leb K'aarna would scowl and mutter, and Yishana would laugh at him and glance
brightly at Elric. So they came to Thokora and found it a smoulder-ing pit that stank like a midden of
hell. Elric sniffed. 'This is Chaos work. You were right enough there, Theleb K'aarna. Whatever fire destroyed
such a large town, it was not natural fire. Whoever is responsible for this is evidently increas-ing
his power. As you know, sorcerer, the Lords of Law and Chaos are usually in perfect balance, nei-ther
tampering directly with our Earth. Evidently the balance has tipped a little way to one side, as it
sometimes does, favouring the Lords of Disorder-al-lowing them access to our realm. Normally it is possible
for an earthly sorcerer to summon aid from Chaos or Law for a short time, but it is rare for either
side to establish itself so firmly as our friend in the citadel evidently has. What is more disturbing-for
you of the Young Kingdoms, at least-is that, _once such power is gained, it is possible to increase it, and
the Lords of Chaos could in time conquer the Realm of Earth by gradual increase of their strength here.'
'A terrible possibility,' muttered the sorcerer, gen-uinely afraid. Even though he could sometimes summon
help from Chaos, it was in no human being's interest to have Chaos ruling over him. Elric climbed
back into his saddle. 'We'd best make speed to the valley,' he said. 'Are you sure it is wise, after
witnessing this?'
Theleb K'aarna was nervous.
Elric laughed. 'What? And you a sorcerer from Pan Tang-that isle that claims to know as much of
sorcery as my ancestors, the Bright Emperors! No, no-besides, I'm not in a cautious mood today!' 'Nor
am I,' cried Yishana, clapping her steed's sides. 'Come, gentlemen-to the Citadel of Chaos!' By late
afternoon, they had topped the range of hills surrounding the valley and looked down at the mysterious
citadel.
Yishana had described it well-but not perfectly.
Elric's eyes ached as he looked at it, for it seemed to extend beyond the Realm of Earth into a different
plane, perhaps several.
It shimmered and glittered and all Earthly colours were there, as well as many which Elric recognised as
belonging to other planes. Even the basic outline of the citadel was uncertain. In contrast, the surrounding
valley was a sea of dark ash, which some-times seemed to eddy, to undulate and send up
spurting geysers of dust, as if the basic elements of nature had been disturbed, and warped by the
presence of the supernatural citadel. 'Well?' Theleb K'aarna tried to calm his nervous horse as it backed 
away from the citadel. 'Have you seen the like in the world before?'
Elric shook his head. 'Not in this world, certainly:
but I've seen it before. During my final initiation into the arts of Melnibone, my father took me with him
in astral form to the Realm of Chaos, there to receive the audience of my patron the Lord Arioch of the
Seven Darks...'
Theleb K'aarna shuddered. 'You have been to Chaos? It is Arioch's citadel, then?' Elric laughed in
disdain. 'That! No, it is a hovel compared to the palaces of the Lords of Chaos.'
-Impatiently, Yishana said; 'Then who dwells there?'
'As I remember, the one who dwelt in the citadel when I passed through the Chaos Realm in my youthhe
was no Lord of Chaos, but a kind of ser-vant to the Lords. Yet,' he frowned, 'not exactly a servant .... '
'Ach! You speak in riddles. Theleb K'aarna turned his horse to ride down the hills, away from the citadel.
'I know you Melniboneans! Starving, you'd rather have a paradox than food!'
Elric and Yishana followed him some distance,
then Elric stopped. Elric pointed behind him. 'The one who dwells yonder is a paradoxical sort of
fellow. He's a kind of Jester to the Court of Chaos. The Lords of Chaos respect him-perhaps fear him
slightly-even though he entertains them. He delights them with cosmic riddles; with farcical satires
purporting to explain the nature of the Cos-mic Hand that holds both Chaos and Law in bal-ance, he
juggles enigmas like baubles, laughs at what Chaos holds dear, takes seriously that which they mock at .
. .' He paused and shrugged. 'So I have heard, at least.'
'Why should he be here?'
'Why should he be anywhere? I could guess at the motives of Chaos or Law and probably be right. But
not even the Lords of the Higher Worlds can under-stand the motives of Balo the Jester. It is said that he
is the only one allowed to move between the Realms of Chaos and Law at will, though I have never
heard of him coming to the Realm of Earth before. Neither, for that matter, have I ever heard him
credited with such acts of destruction as that which we've witnessed. It is a puzzle to me-one which
would no doubt please him if he knew.' 'There would be one way of discovering the pur-pose of his
visit,' Theleb K'aarna said with a faint smile. 'If someone entered the citadel...' 'Come now, sorcerer,'
Elric mocked. 'I've little love for life, to be sure, but there are some things of value to me-my soul, for
one!'
Theleb K'aarna began to ride on down the hill, but. Elric remained thoughtfully where he was, Yishana
beside him.
'You seem more troubled by this than you should be, Elric,' she said.
'It is disturbing. There is a hint here that, if we investigate the citadel further, we should become
embroiled in some dispute between Balo and his masters-perhaps even the Lords of Law, too. To become
so involved could easily mean our destruction, since the forces at work are more dangerous and
powerful than anything we are familiar with on Earth.'
'But we cannot simply watch this Balo laying our cities waste, carrying off our fairest, threatening to rule
Jharkor himself within a short time!' Elric sighed, but did not reply.
'Have you no sorcery, Elric, to send Balo back to Chaos where he belongs, to seal the breach he has
made in our Realm?'
'Even Melniboneans cannot match the power of the Lords of the Higher Worlds-and my forefathers
knew much more of sorcery than do I. My best allies serve neither Chain nor Law, they are elementals:
lords of fire, earth, air, and water, entities with affin-ities with beasts and plants. Good allies in an earthly
battle-but of no great use when matched against one such as Balo. I must think. ... At least, if I opposed
Balo it would not necessarily incur the wrath of my patron Lords. Something, I suppose .... ' The hills
rolled green and lush to the grasslands at their feet, the sun beat down from a clear sky on the infinity of
grass stretching to the horizon. Above them a large predatory bird wheeled; and Theleb K'aarna was a
tiny figure, turning in the saddle to call to them in a thin voice, but his words could not be heard.
Yishana seemed dispirited. Her shoulders slightly slumped, and she did not look at Elric as she began to 
guide her horse slowly down towards the sorcerer of Pan Tang. Elric followed, conscious of his own indecision,
yet half-careless of it. What did it matter to him if... ?
The music began, faintly at first, but beginning to swell with an attractive, poignant sweetness, evoking
nostalgic memories, offering peace and giving life a sharp meaning, all at once. If the music came from
instruments, then they were not earthly. It produced in him a yearning to turn about and discover its
source, but he resisted it. Yishana, on the other hand, was evidently not finding the music so easily
resisted. She had wheeled completely round, her face radiant, her lips trembling and tears shining in her
eyes. Elric, in his wanderings in unearthly realms, had heard music like it before-it echoed many of the
bi-zarre symphonies of old Melnibone-and it did not draw him as it drew Yishana. He recognised swiftly
that she was in danger, and as she came past him, spurring her horse, he reached out to grab her bridle.
Her whip slashed at his hand and, cursing with unexpected pain, he dropped the bridle. She went past
him, galloping up to the crest of the hill and vanishing over it in an instant.
'Yishana!' He shouted at her desperately, but his voice would not carry over the pulsing music. He
looked back, hoping that Theleb K'aarna would lend help, but the sorcerer was riding rapidly away.
Evidently, on hearing the music, he had come to a swift decision.
Elric raced after Yishana, screaming for her to turn back. His own horse reached the top of the hill and
he saw her bent over her steed's neck as she goaded it towards the shining citadel. "Yishana! You go to
your doom!"
Now she had reached the outer limits of the citadel, and her horse's feet seemed to strike off shimmering
waves of colour as they touched the Chaos-disturbed ground surrounding the place. Al-though he knew it
was too late to stop her, Elric continued to speed after her, hoping to reach her before she entered the
citadel itself. But, even as he entered the rainbow swirl, he saw what appeared to be a dozen Yishanas
going through a dozen gateways into the citadel. Oddly refracted light created the illusion and made it
impossible m tell which was the real Yishana.
With Yishana's disappearance the music stopped and Elric thought he heard a faint whisper of laugh-ter
following it. His horse was by this time becoming increasingly difficult to control, and he did not trust
himself to it. He dismounted, his legs wreathed in ra-diant mist, and let the horse go. It galloped off,
snorting its terror.
Elric's left hand moved to the hilt of his rune-sword, but he hesitated to draw it. Once pulled from its
scabbard, the blade would demand souls before it allowed itself to be resheathed. Yet it was his only
weapon. He withdrew his hand, and the blade seemed to quiver angrily at his side. 'Not yet,
Stormbringer. There may be forces within who are stronger even than you!' He-began to wade through
the Faintly-resisting light swirls. He was halt-blinded by the scintillating colours around him, which
sometimes shone dark blue, silver, and red; sometimes gold, light green, amber. He also felt the
sickening lack of any sort of orientation-distance, depth, breadth were mean-ingless. He recognised what
he had only experienced in an astral form-the odd, timeless, spaceless quality that marked a Realm of the
Higher Worlds. He drifted, pushing his body in the direction in which he Yishana had for now guessed
gone, by he had lost sight of the gateway or any of its mirage images.
He realised that, unless he was doomed to drift here until he starved, he must draw Stormbringer; for the
runeblade could resist the influence of Chaos. This time, when he gripped the sword's hilt, he felt a
shock run up his arm and infuse his body with vitality. The sword came free from the scabbard. From
the huge blade, carved with strange old runes, a black radiance poured, meeting the shifting colours of
Chaos and dispersing them. Now Elric shrieked the age-old battle-ululation of his folk and pressed on
into the citadel, slashing at the intangible images that swirled on all sides. The gateway was ahead, and
Elric knew it now, for his sword had shown him which were the mirages. It was open as Elric reached
the portal. He paused for a moment, his lips moving as he remembered an invo-cation that he might need
later. Arioch, Lord of Chaos, patron god-demon of his ancestors, was a negligent power and whimful-he
could not rely on Arioch to aid him here, unless...
In slow, graceful strides, a golden beast with eyes of ruby-fire was loping down the passage that led from 
the portal. Bright though the eyes were, they seemed blind, and its huge, doglike muzzle was closed. Yet
its path could only lead it to Elric and, as it neared him, the mouth suddenly gaped showing coral fangs.
In silence it came to a halt, the blind eyes never once settling on the albino, and then sprang! Elric
staggered back, raising the sword in defense. He was flung to the ground by the beast's weight and felt
its body cover him. It was cold, cold, and it made no attempt to savage him-just lay on top of him and let
the cold permeate his body. Elric began to shiver as he pushed at the chilling body of the beast.
Stormbringer moaned and tour-mured in his hand, and then it pierced some part of the beast's body, and
a horrible cold strength began to fill the albino. Reinforced by the beast's own life-force, he heaved
upwards. The" beast continued to smother him, though now a thin, barely audible sound was coming
from it. Elric guessed that Stormbringer's small wound was hurting the crea-ture.
Desperately, for he was shaking and aching with cold, he moved the sword and stabbed again. Again the
thin sound from the beast; again cold energy flooded through him, and again he heaved. This time the
beast was flung off and crawled back towards the portal. Elric sprang up, raised Storm-bringer high, and
brought the sword down on the golden creature's skull. The skull shattered as ice might shatter.
Elric rang forward into the passage and, once within, the place became filled with roars and shrieks that
echoed and were magnified. It Was as if the voice that the cold beast had lacked outside Was shouting its
death-agonies here.
Now the floor rose until he was running up a spi-ral ramp. Looking down, he shuddered, for he looked
into an infinite pit of subtle, dangerous colours that swam about in such a way that he could hardly take
his eyes from them. He even felt his body begin to leave the ramp and go towards the pit, but he
strengthened his grip on the sword and dis-ciplined himself to climb on.
Upwards, as he looked, was the same as down' wards. Only the ramp had any kind of constancy, and this
began to take on the appearance of a thinly-cut jewel, through which he could See the pit and in which it
was reflected.
Greens and blues and yellows predominated, but there were also traces of dark red, black, and orange,
and many other colours not in an ordinary human spectrum.
Elric knew he was in some province of the Higher Worlds and guessed that it would not be long before
the ramp led him to new danger.
Danger did not seem to await him when at last he came to the end of the ramp and stepped on to a bridge
of similar stuff, which led over the scintillat-ing pit to an archway that shone with a steady blue light.
He crossed the bridge cautiously and as cautiously entered the arch. Everything was blue-tinged here,
even himself: and he trod on, the blue becoming deeper and deeper as he progressed. Then Stormbringer
began to murmur and, either warned by the sword or by some sixth sense of his own, Elric wheeled to
his right. Another archway had appeared there and from this there began to shine a light as deep red as
the other was blue. Where the two met was a purple of fantastic richness and Elric stared at this,
experiencing a similar hyp-notic pull as he had had when climbing the ramp. Again his mind was
stronger, and he forced himself to enter the red arch. At once another arch appeared to his left, sending a
beam of green light to merge with the red, and another to his left brought yellow light, one ahead brought
mauve until he seemed trapped within the criss-cross of beams. He slashed at them with Stormbringer,
and the black radiance reduced .the beams for a moment to streamers of light, which reformed again.
Elric continued to move forward.
Now, looming through the confusion of colour, a shape appeared and Elric thought it was that of a man.
Man it was in shape-but not in size it seemed. Yet, when it drew closer, it was no giant-less than Elric's
height.-Still it gave the impression of vast pro-portions, rather as if it were a giant and Elric had grown to
its size.
It blundered towards Elric and went through him. It was not that the man was intangible-it was Elric
who felt the ghost. The creature's mass seemed of in-credible density. The creature was turning, its huge
hands reaching out, its face a mocking grimace. Elric struck at it with Stormbringer and was astonished
as the runesword was halted, making no impression on the creature's bulk.
Yet when it grasped Elric, its hands went through him. Elric backed away, grinning now in relief. Then
he saw with some terror that the light was gleaming through him. He had been right-he was the ghost!
The creature reached out for him again, grabbed him again, failed to hold him.
Elric, conscious that he was in no physical dan-ger from the monster, yet also highly conscious that his
sanity was about to be permanently impaired, turned and fled.
Quite suddenly he was in a hall, the walls of which were of the same unstable, shifting colours as the rest
of the place. But sitting on a stool in the centre of the hall, holding in his hands some tiny creatures that
seemed to be running about on his palm, was a small figure who looked up at Elric and grinned merrily.
'Welcome, King of Melnibone. And how fares the last ruler of my favourite earthly race?' The figure was
dressed in shimmering motley. On his head was a tall, spiked crown-a travesty of and a comment upon
the crowns of the mighty. His face was angular and his mouth wide.
'Greetings, Lord Balo,' Elric made a mock bow.
'Strange hospitality you offer in your welcome.' 'Ahaha-it did" not amuse you, eh? Men are so much
harder to please than gods-you would not think it, would you?'
'Men's pleasures are rarely so elaborate. Where is Queen Yishana?'
'Allow me my pleasures also, mortal. Here she is, I think.' Balo plucked at one of the tiny creatures on
his palm. Elric stepped forward and saw that Yishana was indeed there, as were many of the lost
soldiers. Balo looked up at him and winked. 'They are so much easier to handle in this size.' 'I do not
doubt it, though I wonder if it is not we who are larger rather than they who are smaller .... ' 'You are
astute, mortal. But can you guess how this came to be?'
'Your creature back there-your pits and colours and archways-somehow they warp-what?' 'Mass, King
Elric. But you would not understand such concepts. Even the Lords of Melnibone, most godlike and
intelligent of mortals, only learned how to manipulate the elements in ritual, invocation, and spell, but
never understood what they manipu-lated-that is where the Lords of the Higher Worlds score, whatever
their differences.' 'But I survived without need for spells. I survived by disciplining my mind!'
'That helped, for certain-but you forget your greatest asset-that disturbing blade there. You use it in your
petty problems to aid you, and you never realise that it is like making use of a mighty war gal-ley to
catch a sprat. That sword represents power in any Realm, King Elric!'
'Aye, so it might. This does not interest me. Why are you here, Lord Balo?'
Balo chuckled, his laughter rich and musical. 'Oho, I am in disgrace. I quarrelled with my mas-ters, who
took exception to a joke of mine about their insignificance and egotism, about their destiny and their
pride. Bad taste to them, King, is any hint of their own oblivion. I made a joke in bad taste. I fled from
the Higher Worlds to Earth, where, unless invoked, the Lords of Law or Chaos can rarely inter-fere. You
will like my intention, Elric, as would any Melnibonean-I intend to establish my own Realm on Earth-the
Realm of Paradox. A little from Law, a little from Chaos-a Realm of opposites, Of curiosi-ties and
jokes.'
'I'm thinking we already have such a world as you describe, Lord Balo, with no need for you to create it!'
'Earnest irony, King Elric, for an insouciant man of Melnibone.'
'Ah, that it may be. I am a boor on occasions such as these. Will you release Yishana and myself?' 'But
you and I are giants-I have given you the status and appearance of a god. You and I could be partners in
this enterprise Of miner' 'Unfortunately, Lord Balo, I do not possess your range of humour and am
unfitted for such an exalt-ed role. Besides,' Elric grinned suddenly, 'it is in my mind that the Lords of the
Higher Worlds will not easily let drop the matter of your ambition, since it appears to conflict so strongly
with theirs.' Balo laughed but said nothing.
Elric also smiled, but it was an attempt to hide his racing thoughts. 'What do you intend to do if I refuse?'
'Why, Elric, you would not refuse I can think of many subtle pranks that I could play on you...' 'Indeed?
And the Black Swords?'
'Ah, yes ...'
'Balo, in your mirth and obsessions you have not considered everything thoroughly. You should have
exerted more effort to .vanquish me before I came here.'
Now Elric's eyes gleamed hot and he lifted the sword, crying:
"Arioch! Master! I invoke thee, Lord of Chaos!"
Balo started. 'Cease that, King Elric!'
"Arioch-here is a soul for you to claim!'
'Quiet, I say!'
"Arioch! Hear me!" Elric's voice was loud and des-perate.
Balo let his tiny playthings fall and rose hurriedly, skipping towards Elric.
'Your invocation is unheeded!' He laughed, reach-ing out for Elric. But Stormbringer moaned and
shuddered in Elric's hand and Balo withdrew his hand. His face became serious and frowning. 'Arioch of
the Seven Darks-your servant calls you!'
The walls of flame trembled and began to fade.
Balo's eyes widened and jerked this way and that. "Oh, Lord Arioch-come reclaim your straying Balo!"
'You cannot!' Balo scampered across the room where one section of the flame had faded entirely,
revealing darkness beyond.
'Sadly for you, little jester, he can..." The voice Was sardonic and yet beautiful. From the darkness
stepped a tall figure, no longer the shapeless gibber-ing thing that had, until now, been Arioch's favoured
manifestation when visiting the Realm of Earth. Yet the great beauty of the newcomer, filled as it
was with a kind of compassion mingled with pride, cruelty, and sadness, showed at once that he could
not be human. He was clad in doublet of puls-ing scarlet, hose of ever-changing hue, a long golden
sword at his hips. His eyes were large, but slanted high, his hair was long and as golden as the sword, his
lips were full and his chin pointed like his ears. 'Arioch!' Balo stumbled backwards as the Lord of Chaos
advanced.
'It was your mistake, Balo,' Elric said from behind the jester. 'Did you not realise only the Kings of
Melnibone may invoke Arioch and bring him to the Realm of Earth? It has been their age-old privilege.'
'And much have they abused it,' said Arioch, smiling faintly as Balo groveled. 'However, this service you
have done us, Elric, will make up for past misuses. I was not amused by the matter of the Mist Giant ...'
Even Elric was awed by the incredibly powerful presence of the Chaos Lord. He also felt much relieved,
for he had not been sure that Arioch could be summoned in this way.
Now Arioch stretched an arm down towards Balo and lifted the jester by his collar so that he jerked and
struggled in the air, his face writhing in fear and consternation.
Arioch took hold of Balo's head and squeezed it. Elric looked on in amazement as the head began to
shrink. Arioch took Balo's legs and bent them in, folding Balo up and kneading him in his slender, inhuman
hands until he was a small, solid ball. Arioch then popped the ball into his mouth and swallowed
it. 'I have not eaten him, Elric,' he said with another faint smile. 'It is merely the easiest way of transporting
him back to the Realms from which he came. He has transgressed and will be punished. All this'-he
waved an arm to indicate the citadel-'is unfortu-nate and contradicts the plans we of Chaos have for
Earth-plans which will involve you, our servant, and make you mighty.'
Elric bowed to his master. 'I am honoured, Lord Arioch, though I seek no favours.'
Arioch's silvery voice lost some of its beauty and his face seemed to cloud for a second. 'You are
pledged to serve Chaos, Elric, as were your an-cestors. You will serve Chaos! The time draws near when
both Law and Chaos will battle for the Realm of Earth-and Chaos shall win! Earth will be incor-porated
into our Realm and you will join the hierar-chy of Chaos, become immortal as we are!' 'Immortality
offers little to me, my lord.' 'Ah, Elric, have the men of Melnibone become as the half-apes who now
dominate Earth with their puny "civilisations"? Are you no better than these Young Kingdom upstarts?
Think what we offer!' 'I shall, my lord, when" the time you mention comes.' Elric's head was still
lowered. 'You shall indeed,' Arioch raised his arms. 'Now to transport this toy of Balo's to its proper
Realm, and redress the trouble he has caused, lest some hint reaches our opponents before the proper 
time.' Arioch's voice swelled like the singing of a million brazen bells and Elric sheathed his sword and
clapped his hands over his ears to stop the pain. Then Elric felt his body seem to shred apart, swell and
stretch until it became like smoke drifting on air. Then, faster, the smoke began to be drawn to-gether,
becoming denser and denser and he seemed to be shrinking now. All around him were rolling banks of
colour, flashes and indescribable noises. Then came a vast blackness and he closed his eyes against the
images that seemed reflected in the blackness.
When he opened them he stood in the valley and the singing citadel was gone. Only Yishana and a few
surprised-looking soldiers stood there. Yishana ran towards him.
'Elric-was it you who saved us?'
'I must claim only part of the credit,' he said. 'Not all my soldiers are here,' she said, inspecting the men.
Where are the rest-and the villagers ab-ducted earlier?'
'If Balo's tastes are like his masters', then I fear they now have the honour of being part of a demi-god.
The Lords of Chaos are not flesh-eaters, of course, being of the Higher Worlds, but there is something
they savour in men which satisfies them...'
Yishana hugged her body as if in cold. 'He was huge-I cannot believe that his citadel could contain his
bulk!'
'The citadel was more than a dwelling-place, that was obvious. Somehow it changed size, shape-and
other things I cannot describe. Arioch of Chaos transported it and Balo back to where they belong,'
'Arioch! But he is one of the Greatest Six! How did he come to Earth?'
'An old pact with my remote ancestors. By calling him they allow him to spend a short time in our realm,
and he repays them with some favour. This was done.'
'Come, Elric,' she took his arm. 'Let's away from the valley.'
Elric was weak and enfeebled by the efforts of summoning Arioch, and the experiences he had had
before and since the episode. He could hardly walk; and soon it was Yishana who supported him as they
made slow progress, the dazed warriors following in their wake, towards the nearest village, where they
could obtain rest and horses to take them back to Dhakos.
FIVE
As they staggered past the blasted ruins of Tho-kara, Yishana pointed suddenly at the sky. 'What is that?
A great shape was winging its way towards them. It had the appearance of a butterfly, but a butterfly
with wings so huge they blotted out the sun. 'Can it be some creature of Balo's left behind?" she
speculated.
'Hardly likely,' he replied. 'This has the appear-ance of a monster conjured by a human sorcerer.' 'Theleb
K'aarna!'
'He has surpassed himself,' Elric said wryly. 'I did not think him capable.'
'It is his vengeance on us, Elric!' 'That seems reasonable. But I am weak, Yishana- and Stormbringer
needs souls if it is to replenish my strength.' He turned a calculating eye on the warriors behind him who
were gaping up at the creature as it came nearer. Now they could see it had a man's body, covered with
hairs or feathers hued like a peacock's.
The air whistled as it descended, its fifty-foot wings dwarfing the seven feet of head and body. From its
head grew two curling horns, and its arms terminated in long talons.
'We are doomed, Elric!' cried Yishana. She saw that the warriors were fleeing and she cried after them to
come back. Elric stood there passively, knowing that alone he could not defeat the butter-fly-creature.
'Best go with them, Yishana,' he murmured. 'I think it will be satisfied with me.' 'No!'
He ignored her and stepped towards" the creature as it landed and began to glide over the ground in his
direction. He drew a quiescent Stormbringer, which felt heavy in his hand. A little strength flowed into
him, but not enough. His only hope was to strike a good blow at the creature's vitals and draw some of its
own life-force into himself. The creature's voice shrilled at him, and the strange, insane face twisted as 
he approached. Elric realised that this was no true supernatural denizen of the nether worlds, but a oncehuman
creature warped by Theleb K'aarna's sorcery. At least it was mortal, and he had only physical
strength to contend with. In better condition it would have been easy for him-but now ....
The wings beat at the air as the taloned hands grasped at him. He took Stormbringer in both hands and
swung the runeblade at the thing's neck. Swiftly the wings folded in to protect its neck and Storm-bringer
became entangled in the strange, sticky flesh. A talon caught Elric's arm, ripping it to the bone. He
yelled in pain and yanked the sword from the en-folding wing.
He tried to steady himself for another blow, but the monster grabbed his wounded arm and began
drawing him towards its now lowered head-and the horns that curled from it.
He struggled, hacking at the thing's arms with the extra strength that came with the threat of death. Then
he heard a cry from behind him and saw a figure from the corner of his eye, a figure that leapt forward
with two blades gleaming in either hand. The swords slashed at the talons and with a shriek the creature
turned on Elric's w0uld-be rescuer. It was Moonglum. Elric fell backwards, breathing hard, as he
watched his little red-headed friend en-gage the monster.
But Moonglum would not survive for long, unless aided.
Elric racked his brain for some spell that would help; but he was too' weak, even if he could think of one,
to raise the energy necessary to summon super-natural help.
And then it came to him! Yishana! She was not as exhausted as he. But could she do it? He turned as the
air moaned to the beating of the creature's wings. Moonglum was only just managing to hold it off, his
two swords flashing rapidly as he parried every effort to grasp him.
'Yishana!' croaked the albino.
She came up to him and placed a hand on his. "We could leave, Elric-perhaps hide from that thing.' 'No.
I must help Moonglum. Listen-you realise how desperate our position is, do you not? Then keep that in
mind while you recite this rune with me. Perhaps together we may succeed. There are many kinds of
lizards in these parts, are there not?' 'Aye-many.'
'Then this is what you must say-and remember that we shall all perish by Theleb K'aarna's servant if you
are not successful.'
In the half worlds, where dwelt the master-types of all creatures other than Man, an entity stirred, hearing
its name. The entity was called Haaashaas-taak; and it was scaly and cold, with no true intellect, such as
men and gods possessed, but an awareness, which served it as well if not better. It was brother, on this
plane, to such entities as Meerclar, Lord of the Cats, Roofdrak, Lord of the Dogs, Nuru-ah, Lord of the
Cattle, and many, many others. This was Haaashaastaak, Lord of the Lizards. It did not really hear words
in the exact sense, but it heard rhythms which meant much to it, even though it did not know why. The
rhythms were being repeated over and over again, but seemed too faint to be worth much atten-tion. It
stirred and yawned, but did nothing...
'Haaashaastaak, Lord of Lizards,
Your children were fathers of men,
Haaashaastaak, Prince of Reptiles.
Come aid a grandchild now.
'Haaashaastaak, Father of Scales,
Cold-blooded bringer of life..."
It was a bizarre scene, with Elric and Yishana des-perately chanting the rune over and over again as
Moonglum fought on, slowly losing strength, Haaashaastaak quivered and became more curi-ous. The
rhythms were no stronger, yet they seemed more insistent. He would travel, he decided, to that place
where those he watched over dwelt. He knew that if he answered the rhythms, he would have to obey
whatever source they had. He was not, of course, aware that such decisions had been implant-ed into him
in a far distant age-the time before the creation of Earth, when the Lords of Law and Chaos, then 
inhabitants of a single realm and known by an-other name, had watched over the forming of things and
laid down the manner and logic in which things should behave, following their great edict from the voice
of the Cosmic Balance-the voice which had never spoken since.
Haaashaastaak betook himself, a little slothfully, to Earth.
Elric and Yishana were still chanting hoarsely, as Haaashaastaak made his sudden appearance. He had
the look of a huge iguana, and his eyes were many-coloured, many faceted jewels, his scales seeming of
gold, silver, and other rich metals. A slightly hazy outline surrounded him, as if he had brought part of
his own environment with him.
Yishana gasped and Elric breathed a deep sigh. As a child he had learned the languages of all animalmasters,
and now he must recall the simple language of the lizard-master, Haaashaastaak. His need fired
his brain, and the words came sud-denly.
'Haaashaastaak,' he cried pointing at the butterfly-creature, 'mokik ankkuh!'
The lizard lord turned its jewelled eyes on the creature and its great tongue suddenly shot out towards it,
curling around the monster. It shrilled in terror as it was drawn towards the lizard lord's great maw. Legs
and arms kicked as the mouth closed on it. Several gulps and Haaashaastaak had swallowed Theleb
K'aarna's prize creation. Then it turned its head uncertainly about for a few moments and van-ished.
Pain began to throb now through Elric's torn arm as Moonglum staggered towards him, grinning in relief.
'I followed behind you at a distance as you re-quested,' he said, 'since you suspected treachery from
Theleb K'aarna. But than I spied the sorcerer coming this way and followed him to a cave in yonder
hills,' he pointed. 'But when the deceased,' he laughed shakily, 'emerged from the cave, I decided that it
would be best to chase that, for I had the feeling it -was going in your direction.'
'I am glad you were so astute,' Elric said.
,It was your doing, really,' Moonglum replied. 'For, if you hadn't anticipated treachery from The-leb
K'aarna, I might not have been here at the right moment.' Moonglum suddenly sank to the grass, leaned
back, grinned, and fainted.
Elric felt very dazed himself. 'I do not think we need fear anything more from your sorcerer just yet,
Yishana,' he said. 'Let us rest here and refresh ourselves. Perhaps then your cowardly soldiers will have
returned, and we can send them to a village to get us some horses.'
They stretched out on the grass and, lying in each other's arms, went to sleep.
Elric was astonished to Wake in a bed, a soft bed. He opened his eves and saw Yishana and Moonglum
smiling down at him.
'How long have I been here?'
'More than two days. You did not wake when the horses came, so we had the warriors construct a
stretcher to bear you to Dhakos. You are in my palace.'
Elric cautiously moved his stiff, bandaged arm. It was still painful. 'Are my belongings still at the inn?'
'Perhaps, if they have not been stolen. Why?' 'I have a pouch of herbs there, which will heal this arm
quickly and also supply me with a little strength, which I need badly.'
'I will go and see if they are still there,' Moon-glum said and walked from the chamber. Yishana stroked
Elric's milk-white hair. 'I have much to thank you for, wolf,' said she. "You have saved my kingdomperhaps
all the Young King-doms. In my eyes you are redeemed for my brother's death.'
'Oh, I thank you, madam,' said Elric with a mock-hag tone.
She laughed, 'You are still a Melnibonean.'
'Still that, aye.'
'A strange mixture, however. Sensitive and cruel, sardonic and loyal to your little friend Moonglum. I
look forward to knowing you better, my lord.' 'As to that, I am not sure if you will have the op-portunity.'
She gave him a hard look. 'Why?'
'Your resume of my character was incomplete, Queen Yishana-you should have added "careless of the
world-and yet vengeful." I wish to be revenged on your pet wizard.'
'But he is spent, surely, you said so yourself.' 'I am, as you remarked, still a Melnibonean! My arrogant
blood calls vengeance on an upstart!'
'Forget Theleb K'aarna. I will have him hunted by my White Leopards. Even his sorcery will not win
against such savages as they are!' 'Forget him?
Oh, no!'
'Elric, Elric-I will give yon my kingdom, declare you ruler of Jharkor, if you will let me be your consort.'
He reached out and stroked her bare arm with his good hand.
'You are unrealistic, queen. To take such an ac-tion would bring wholesale rebellion in your land. To
your folk, I am still the Traitor of Imrryr.'
'Not now-now you are the Hero of Jharkor.' 'How so? They did not know of their peril and thus will feel
no gratitude. It were best that I settled my debt with your wizard and went on my way. The streets must
already be full of rumours that you have taken your brother's murderer to your bed. Your popularity with
your subjects must be at its lowest, madam.'
'I do not care.'
'You will if your nobles lead the people in insurrec-tion and crucify yon naked in the city square.' 'You
are familiar with our customs.'
'We Melniboneans are a learned folk, queen.'
'Well versed in all the arts.'
'All of them.' Again he felt his blood race as she rose and barred the door. At that moment he felt no need
for the herbs which Moonglum had gone to find.
When he tiptoed from the room that night, he found Moonglum waiting patiently in the antecham-ber.
Moonglum proffered the pouch with a wink. But Elric's mood was not light. He took bunches of herbs
from the pouch and selected what he needed. Moonglum grimaced as he watched Elric chew and
swallow the stuff. Then together they stole from the palace.
Armed with Stormbringer and mounted, Elric rode slightly behind his friend as Moonglum led the way
towards the hills beyond Dhakos.
'If I know the sorcerers of Pan Tang', murmured the albino, 'then Theleb K'aarna will be more ex-hausted
than was I. With luck we will come upon him sleeping.'
'I shall wait outside the cave in that case," said Moonglum, for he now had some experience of Elric's
vengeance-taking and did not relish watching Theleb K'aarna's slow death.
They galloped speedily unto the hills were reached and Moonglum showed Elric the cave mouth.
Leaving his horse, the albino went soft-footed into the cave, his runesword ready.
Moonglum waited nervously for Theleb K'aarna's first shrieks, but none came. He waited until dawn
began to bring the first faint light and then Elric, face frozen with anger emerged from the cave.
Savagely he grasped his horse's reins and swung himself into the saddle.
'Are you satisfied?' Moonglum asked tentatively.
'Satisfied, no! The dog has vanished!'
'Gone-but...'
'He was more cunning than I thought. There are several caves and I sought him in all of them. In the
farthest I discovered traces of sorcerous runes on the walls and floor. He has transported himself somewhere
and I could not discover where, in spite of de-ciphering most of the runes! Perhaps he went to Pan
Tang.'
'Ah, then our quest has been futile. Let us return to Dhakos and enjoy a little more of Yishana's hospitality.'
'No-we go to Pan Tang.'
'But, Elric, Theleb K'aarna's brother sorcerers dwell there in strength; and Jagreen Lern, the theocrat, forbids
Visitors!'
'No matter. I wish to finish my business with The-leb K'aarna.'
'You have no proof that he is there!' ..
"No matter!"
And then Elric was spurring his horse away, riding like a man possessed or fleeing from dreadful periland
perhaps he was both possessed and fleeing. Moonglum did not follow at once but thoughtfully
watched his friend gallop off. Not normally intro-spective, he wondered if Yisbana had perhaps af-fected
the albino more strongly than he would have wished. He did not think that vengeance on Theleb K'aarna
was Elric's prime desire in refusing to re-turn to Dhakos.
Then he shrugged and clapped his heels to his steed's flank, racing to catch up with Elric as the cold
dawn rose, wondering if they would continue towards Pan Tang once Dhakos was far enough be-hind.
But Elric's head contained no thoughts, only emo-tion flooded him-emotion he did not wish to ana-lyse.
His white hair streaming behind him, his dead-white, handsome face set, his slender hands tightly
clutching the stallion's reins, he rode. And only his strange, crimson eyes reflected the misery and conflict
within him.
In Dhakos that morning, other eyes held misery, but not for too long. Yishana was a pragmatic queen.
The Vanishing Tower
By
Michael Moorcock
BOOK ONE
The Torment of the Last Lord
.. . and then did Elric leave Jharkor
in pursuit of a certain sorcerer who
had, so Elric claimed, caused him
some inconvenience ...
-The Chronicle of the Black Sword
CHAPTER ONE
Pale Prince on a Moonlit Shore
In the sky, a cold moon, cloaked in clouds, sent down faint light that fell upon a sullen sea where a ship
lay at anchor off an uninhabited coast.
From the ship a boat was being lowered. It swayed in its harness. Two figures, swathed in long capes,
watched the seamen lowering the boat while they, themselves, tried to calm horses which stamped their
hooves on the unstable deck and snorted and rolled their eyes.
The shorter figure clung hard to his horse's bridle and grumbled.
"Why should this be necessary? Why could not we have disembarked at Trepesaz? Or at least some fishing
harbour boasting an inn, however lowly. . . ."
"Because, friend Moonglum, I wish our arrival in Lormyr to be secret. If Theleb K'aarna knew of my
coming-as he soon would if we went to Trepesaz -then he would fly again and the chase would begin
afresh. Would you welcome that?"
Moonglum shrugged. "I still feel that your pursuit of this sorcerer is no more than a surrogate for real
activity. You seek him because you do not wish to seek your proper destiny. ..."
Elric turned his bone-white face in the moonlight and regarded Moonglum with crimson, moody eyes.
"And what of it? You need not accompany me if you do not wish to. ..."
Again Moonglum shrugged his shoulders. "Aye. I know. Perhaps I stay with you for the same reasons
that you pursue the sorcerer of Pan Tang." He grinned. "So that's enough of debate, eh, Lord Elric?"
"Debate achieves nothing," Elric agreed. He patted his horse's nose as more seamen, clad in colourful
Tarkeshite silks, came forward to take the horses and hoist them down to the waiting boat.
Struggling, whinnying through the bags muffling their heads, the horses were lowered, their hooves
thudding on the bottom of the boat as if they would stave it in. Then Elric and Moonglum, their bundles
on their backs, swung down the ropes and jumped into the rock-ing craft. The sailors pushed off from the
ship with their oars and then, bodies bending, began to row for the shore.
The late autumn air was cold. Moonglum shivered as he stared towards the bleak cliffs ahead. "Winter is
near and I'd rather be domiciled at some friendly tavern than roaming abroad. When this business is done
with the sorcerer, what say we head for Jadmar or one of the other big Vilmirian cities and see what
mood the warmer clime puts us in?"
But Elric did not reply. His strange eyes stared into the darkness and they seemed to be peering into the
depths of his own soul and not liking what they saw.
Moonglum sighed and pursed his lips. He huddled deeper in his cloak and rubbed his hands to warm
them. He was used to his friend's sudden lapses of silence, but familiarity did not make him enjoy them
any better. From somewhere on the shore a nightbird shrieked and a small animal squealed. The sailors
grunted as they pulled on their oars.
The moon came out from behind the clouds and it shone on Elric's grim, white face, made his crimson 
eyes seem to glow like the coals of hell, revealed the barren cliffs of the shore.
The sailors shipped their oars as the boat's bottom ground on shingle. The horses, smelling land, snorted
and moved their hooves. Elric and Moonglum rose to steady them.
Two seamen leaped into the cold water and brought
the boat up higher. Another patted the neck of Elric's
horse and did not look directly at the albino as he
spoke. "The captain said you would pay me when we reached the Lormyrian shore, my lord."
Elric grunted and reached under his cloak. He drew out a jewel that shone brightly through the darkness
of the night. The sailor gasped and stretched out his hand to take it. "Xiombarg's blood, I have never seen
so fine a gem!"
Elric began to lead the horse into the shallows and Moonglum hastily followed him, cursing under his
breath and shaking his head from side to side.
Laughing among themselves, the sailors shoved the boat back into deeper water.
As Elric and Moonglum mounted their horses and the boat pulled through the darkness towards the ship,
Moonglum said: "That jewel was worth a hundred times the cost of our passage!"
"What of it?" Elric fitted his feet in his stirrups and made his horse walk towards a part of the cliff which
was less steep than the rest. He stood up in his stirrups for a moment to adjust his cloak and settle
himself more firmly in his saddle. "There is a path here, by the look of it. Much overgrown."
"I would point out," Moonglum said bitterly, "that if it were left to you, Lord Elric, we should have no
means of livelihood at all. If I had not taken the pre-caution of retaining some of the profits made from
the sale of that trireme we captured and auctioned in Dhakos, we should be paupers now."
"Aye," returned Elric carelessly, and he spurred his horse up the path that led to the top of the cliff.
In frustration Moonglum shook his head, but he fol-lowed the albino.
By dawn they were riding over the undulating land-scape of small hills and valleys that made up the terrain
of Lormyr's most northerly peninsula.
"Since Theleb K'aarna must needs live off rich patrons,"
Elric explained as they rode, "he will almost
certainly go to the capital, Iosaz, where King Montan
rules. He will seek service with some noble, perhaps King Montan himself."
"And how soon shall we see the capital, Lord Elric?"
Moonglum looked up at the clouds.
"It is several days' ride, Master Moonglum."
Moonglum sighed. The sky bore signs of snow and the tent he carried rolled behind his saddle was of
thin silk, suitable for the hotter lands of the East and West.
He thanked his gods that he wore a thick quilted jerkin beneath his breastplate and that before he had left
the ship he had pulled on a pair of woollen breeks to go beneath the gaudier breeks of red silk that were
his outer wear. His conical cap of fur, iron and leather had earflaps which were now drawn tightly and secured
by a thong beneath his chin and his heavy deer-skin cape was drawn closely around his shoulders.
Elric, for his part, seemed not to notice the chill weather. His own cape flapped behind him. He wore
breeks of deep blue silk, a high collared shirt of black silk, a steel breastplate lacquered a gleaming
black, like his helmet, and embossed with patterns of delicate silverwork. Behind his saddle were deep
panniers and across this was a bow and a quiver of arrows. At his side swung the huge runesword
Stormbringer, the source of his strength and his misery, and on his right hip was a long dirk, presented
him by Queen Yishana of Jharkor.
Moonglum bore a similar bow and quiver. On each hip was a sword, one short and straight, the other
long and curved, after the fashion of the men of Elwher, his homeland. Both blades were in scabbards of
beautifully worked Ilmioran leather, embellished with stitching of scarlet and gold thread.
Together the pair looked, to those who had not heard of them, like free travelling mercenaries who had
been more successful than most in their chosen careers.
Their horses bore them tirelessly through the country-side. These were tall Shazarian steeds, known all
over the Young Kingdoms for their stamina and intelligence.
After several weeks cooped up in the hold of the Tarke-shite ship they were glad to be moving again.
Now small villages-squat houses of stone and thatch-came in sight, but Elric and Moonglum were
careful to avoid them.
Lormyr was one of the oldest of the Young Kingdoms and much of the world's history had been made
there. Even the Melniboneans had heard the tales of Lormyr's hero of ancient times, Aubec of Malador
of the province of Klant, who was said to have carved new lands from the stuff of Chaos that had once
existed at the World's Edge. But Lormyr had long since declined from her peak of power (though still a
major nation of the South-west) and had mellowed into a nation that was at once picturesque and
cultured. Elric and Moonglum passed pleasant farmsteads, well-nurtured fields, vineyards and orchards
in which the golden-leaved trees were sur-rounded by time-worn, moss-grown walls. A sweet land and a
peaceful land in contrast to the rawer, bustling North-western nations of Jharkor, Tarkesh and Dhari-jor
which they had left behind.
Moonglum gazed around him as they slowed their horses to a trot. "Theleb K'aarna could work much
mis-chief here, Elric. I am reminded of the peaceful hills and plains of Elwher, my own land."
Elric nodded. "Lormyr's years of turbulence ended when she cast off Melnibone's shackles and was first
to proclaim herself a free nation. I have a liking for this restful landscape. It soothes me. Now we have
another reason for finding the sorcerer before he begins to stir his brew of corruption."
Moonglum smiled quietly. "Be careful, my lord, for you are once again succumbing to those soft
emotions you so despise. . . ."
Elric straightened his back. "Come. Let's make haste for Iosaz."
"The sooner we reach a city with a decent tavern and a warm fire, the better." Moonglum drew his cape
tighter about his thin body.
"Then pray that the sorcerer's soul is soon sent to
Limbo, Master Moonglum, for then I'll be content to sit before the fire all winter long if it suits you."
And Elric made his horse break into a sudden gallop as grey evening closed over the tranquil hills.
CHAPTER TWO
White Face Staring Through Snow
Lormyr was famous for her great rivers. It was her rivers that had helped make her rich and had kept her
strong.
After three days' travelling, when a light snow had begun to drift from the sky, Elric and Moonglum rode
out of the hills and saw before them the foaming waters of the Schlan River, tributary of the ZaphraTrepek
which flowed from beyond Iosaz down to the sea at Trepesaz.
No ships sailed the Schlan at this point, for there were rapids and huge waterfalls every few miles, but at
the old town of Stagasaz, built where the Schlan joined the Zaphra-Trepek, Elric planned to send
Moonglum into town and buy a small boat in which they could sail up the Zaphra-Trepek to Iosaz where
Theleb K'aarna was almost certain to be.
They followed the banks of the Schlan now, riding hard and hoping to reach the outskirts of the town before
nightfall. They rode past fishing villages and the houses of minor nobles, they were occasionally
hailed by friendly fishermen who trawled the quieter reaches of the river, but they did not stop. The
fishermen were typical of the area, with ruddy features and huge curl-ing moustaches, dressed in heavily
embroidered linen smocks and leather boots that reached almost to their thighs; men who in past times
had been ever ready to lay down their nets, pick up swords and halberds and mount horses to go to the
defence of their homeland.
"Could we not borrow one of their boats?" Moonglum
suggested. But Elric shook his head. "The fishermen
of the Schlan are well known for their gossiping. The news of our presence might well precede us
and warn Theleb K'aarna."
"You seem needlessly cautious. ..."
"I have lost him too often."
More rapids came in sight. Great black rocks glistened in the gloom and roaring water gushed over them,
sending spray high into the air. There were no houses or villages here and the paths beside the banks
were narrow and treacherous so that Elric and Moon-glum were forced to slow their pace and make their
way with caution.
Moonglum shouted over the noise of the water:
"We'll not reach Stagasaz by nightfall now!"
Elric nodded. "We'll make camp below the rapids.
There."
The snow was still falling and the wind drove it against their faces so that it became even more difficult
to pick their way along the narrow track that now wound high above the river.
But at last the tumult began to die and the track widened out and the waters calmed and, with relief, they
looked about them over the plain to find a likely camping place.
It was Moonglum who saw them first.
His finger was unsteady as he pointed into the sky towards the north.
"Elric. What make you of those?"
Elric peered up into the lowering sky, brushing snowflakes from his face.
His expression was at first puzzled. His brow fur-rowed and his eyes narrowed.
Black shapes against the sky.
Winged shapes.
It was impossible at this distance to judge then: scale, but they did not fly the way birds fly. Elric was reminded
of another flying creature-a creature he had last seen when he and the Sealords fled burning
Imrryr and the folk of Melnibone had released their vengeance upon the reavers.
That vengeance had taken two forms.
The first form had been the golden battle-barges which had waited for the attack as they left the Dreaming
City.
The second form had been the great dragons of the Bright Empire.
And these creatures in the distance had something of the look of dragons.
Had the Melniboneans discovered a means of waking the dragons before the end of their normal sleeping
time? Had they unleashed their dragons to seek out Elric, who had slain his own kin, betrayed his own
un-human kind in order to have revenge on his cousin Yyrkoon who had usurped Elric's place on the
Ruby Throne of Imrryr?
Now Elric's expression hardened into a grim mask. His crimson eyes shone like polished rubies. His left
hand fell upon the hilt of his great black battleblade, the runesword Stormbringer, and he controlled a
rising sense of horror.
For now, in mid-air, the shapes had changed. No longer did they have the appearance of dragons, but this
time they seemed to be like multicoloured swans, whose gleaming feathers caught and diffracted the few
remaining rays of light.
Moonglum gasped as they came nearer.
"They are huge!"
"Draw your swords, friend Moonglum. Draw them now and pray to whatever gods rule over Elwher. For
these are creatures of sorcery and they are doubtless sent by Theleb K'aarna to destroy us. My respect for
that conjurer increases."
"What are they, Elric?"
"Creatures of Chaos. In Melnibone" they are called the Oonai. They can change shape at will. A sorcerer
of great mental discipline, of superlative powers, who knows the apposite spells can master them and
deter-mine their appearance. Some of my ancestors could do such things, but I thought no mere conjurer
of Pan Tang could master the chimerae!"
"Do you know no spell to counter them?"
"None comes readily to mind. Only a Lord of Chaos such as my patron demon Arioch could dismiss
them."
Moonglum shuddered. "Then call your Arioch, I beg you!"
Elric darted a half-amused glance at Moonglum. "These creatures must fill you with great fear indeed if
you are prepared to entertain the presence of Arioch, Master Moonglum."
Moonglum drew his long, curved sword. "Perhaps they have no business with us," he suggested. "But it
is as well to be prepared."
Elric smiled. "Aye."
Then Moonglum drew his straight sword, curling his horse's reins around his arm.
A shrill, cackling sound from the skies.
The horses pawed at the ground.
The cackling grew louder. The creatures opened their beaks and called to one another and it was very
plain now that they were indeed something other than gigantic swans, for they had curling tongues. And
there were slim, sharp fangs bristling in those beaks. They changed direction slightly, winging straight
for the two men.
Elric flung back his head and drew out his great sword and raised it skyward. It pulsed and moaned and a
strange, black radiance poured from it, casting peculiar shadows over its owner's blanched features.
The Shazarian horse screamed and reared and words began to pour from Elric's tormented face.
"Arioch! Arioch! Arioch! Lord of the Seven Darks, Duke of Chaos, aid me! Aid me now, Arioch!"
Moonglum's own horse had backed away in panic and the little man was having great difficulty in controlling
it. His own features were almost as pale as Elric's.
"Arioch!"
Overhead the chimerae began to circle.
"Arioch! Blood and souls if you will aid me now!"
Then, some yards away, a dark mist seemed to well
up from nowhere. It was a boiling mist that had strange,
disgusting shapes in it
"Arioch!"
The mist grew still thicker.
"Arioch! I beg you-aid me now!"
The horse pawed at the air, snorting and screaming, its eyes rolling, its nostrils flaring. Yet Elric, his lips
curled back over his teeth so that he looked like a rabid wolf, continued to keep his seat as the dark mist
quiv-ered and a strange, unearthly face appeared in the upper part of the shifting column. It was a face of
won-derful beauty, of absolute evil. Moonglum turned his head away, unable to regard it.
A sweet, sibilant voice issued from the beautiful mouth. The mist swirled languidly, becoming a mottled
scarlet laced with emerald green.
"Greetings, Elric," said the face. "Greetings, most beloved of my children."
"Aid me, Arioch!"
"Ah," said the face, its tone full of rich regret. "Ah, that cannot be. ..."
"You must aid me!"
The chimerae had hesitated in their descent, sight-ing the peculiar mist.
"It is impossible, sweetest of my slaves. There are other matters afoot in the Realm of Chaos. Matters of
enormous moment to which I have already referred. I offer only my blessings.
"Arioch-I beg thee!"
"Remember your oath to Chaos and remain loyal to us in spite of all. Farewell, Elric."
And the dark mist vanished.
And the chimerae came closer.
And Elric drew a racking breath while the rune-sword whined in his hand and quivered and its radiance 
dimmed a little.
Moonglum spat on the ground. "A powerful patron,
Elric, but a damned inconstant one." Then he flung
himself from his saddle as a creature which changed
its shape a dozen times as it arrowed towards him
reached out huge claws which clashed in the air where he had been. The riderless horse reared again,
striking out at the beast of Chaos.
A fanged snout snapped.
Blood vomited from the place where the horse's head had been and the carcass kicked once more be-fore
falling to the ground to pour more gore into the greedy earth.
Bearing the remains of the head in what was first a scaled snout, then a beak, then a sharklike mouth, the
Oonai thrashed back into the air.
Moonglum picked himself up. His eyes contem-plated nothing but his own imminent destruction.
Elric, too, leapt from his horse and slapped its flank so that convulsively it began to gallop away towards
the river. Another chimera followed it.
This tune the flying thing seized the horse's body in claws which suddenly sprouted from its feet. The
horse struggled to get free, threatening to break its own back-bone in its struggles, but it could not. The
chimera flapped towards the clouds with its catch.
Snow fell thicker now, but Elric and Moonglum were oblivious of it as they stood together and awaited
the next attack of the Oonai.
Moonglum said quietly: "Is there no other spell you know, friend Elric?"
The albino shook his head. "Nothing specific to deal with these. The Oonai always served the folk of
Melni-bone. They never threatened us. So we needed no spell against them. I am trying to think. . . ."
The chimerae cackled and yelled in the air above the two men's heads.
Then another broke away from the pack and dived to the Earth.
"They attack individually," Elric said in a somewhat detached tone, as if studying insects in a bottle.
"They never attack in a pack. I know not why."
The Oonai had settled on the ground and it had now assumed the shape of an elephant with the huge
head of a crocodile.
"Not an aesthetic combination," said Elric.
The ground shook as it charged towards them.
They stood shoulder to shoulder as it approached.
It was almost upon them-
-and at the last moment they divided, Elric throw-ing himself to one side and Moonglum to the other.
The chimera passed between them and Elric struck at the thing's side with his runesword.
The sword sang out almost lasciviously as it bit deep into the flesh which instantly changed and became
a dragon dripping flaming venom from its fangs.
But it was badly wounded.
Blood ran from the deep wound and the chimera screamed and changed shape again and again as if
seeking some form in which the wound could not exist.
Black blood now burst from its side as if the strain of the many changes had ruptured its body all the
more.
It fell to its knees and the lustre faded from its feath-ers, died from its scales, disappeared from its skin. It
kicked out once and then was still-a heavy, black, piglike creature whose lumpen body was the ugliest
Elric and Moonglum had ever seen.
Moonglum grunted.
"It is not hard to understand why such a creature should want to change its form...."
He looked up.
Another was descending.
This had the appearance of a whale with wings, but with curved fangs, like those of a stomach fish, and a
tail like an enormous corkscrew.
Even as it landed it changed shape again. Now it had assumed human form. It was a huge, beautiful
figure, twice as tall as Elric. It was naked and perfectly proportioned, but its stare was vacant and it had
the drooling lips of an idiot child. Lithely it ran at them, its huge hands reaching out to grasp them as a
child might reach for a toy.
This time Elric and Moonglum struck together, one at each hand.
Moonglum's sharp sword cut the knuckles deeply
and Elric's lopped off two fingers before the Oonai altered its shape again and began first to be an
octopus, then a monstrous tiger, then a combination of both, until at last it was a rock in which a fissure
grew to reveal white, snapping teeth.
Gasping, the two men waited for it to resume the at-tack. At the base of the rock some blood was oozing.
This put a thought into Elric's mind.
With a sudden yell he leapt forward, raised his sword over his head and brought it down on top of the
rock, splitting it in twain.
Something like a laugh issued from the black sword then as the sundered shape flickered and became another
of the piglike creatures. This was completely cut in two, its blood and its entrails spreading
themselves upon the ground.
Then, through the snowy dusk, another of the Oonai came down, its body a glowing orange, its shape
that of a winged snake with a thousand rippling coils.
Elric struck at the coils, but they moved too rapidly.
The other chimerae had been watching his tactics with their dead companions and they had now gauged
the skill of their victims. Almost immediately Elric's arms were pinned to his sides by the coils and he
found himself being borne upward as a second chimera with the same shape rushed down on Moonglum
to seize him in an identical way.
Elric prepared to die as the horses had died. He prayed that he would die swiftly and not slowly, at the
hands of Theleb K'aarna, who had always promised him a slow death.
The scaly wings flapped powerfully. No snout came down to snap his head off.
He felt despair as he realised that he and Moonglum were being carried swiftly northward over the great
Lormyrian steppe.
Doubtless Theleb K'aarna awaited them at the end of their journey.
CHAPTER THREE
Feathers Filling a Great Sky
Night fell and the chimerae flew on tire-lessly, their shapes black against the falling snow.
The coils showed no signs of relaxing, though Elric strove to force them apart, keeping tight hold of his
runesword and racking his brains for some means of defeating the monsters.
If only there were a spell. . .. .
He tried to keep his thoughts from what Theleb K'aarna would do if, indeed, it was that wizard who had
set the Oonai upon them.
Elric's skill in sorcery lay chiefly in his command over the various elementals of air, fire, earth, water
and ether, and also over the entities who had affinities with the flora and fauna of the Earth.
He had decided that his only hope lay in summon-ing the aid of Fileet, Lady of the Birds, who dwelt in a
realm lying beyond the planes of Earth, but the invoca-tion eluded him.
Even if he could remember it, the mind had to be adjusted in a certain way, the correct rhythms of the
incantation remembered, the exact words and inflec-tions recalled, before he could begin to summon
Fileet's aid. For she, more than another elemental, was as difficult to invoke as the fickle Arioch.
Through the drifting snow he heard Moonglum call out something indistinct.
"What was that, Moonglum?" he called back.
"I only-sought to learn-if you still-lived, friend Elric."
"Aye-barely. ..."
His face was chill and ice had formed on his helmet and breastplate. His whole body ached both from the
crushing coils of the chimera and from the biting cold of the upper air.
On and on through the northern night they flew while Elric forced himself to relax, to descend into a
trance and to dredge from his mind the ancient knowledge of his forefathers.
At dawn the clouds had cleared and the sun's red rays spread over the snow like blood over damask.
Everywhere stretched the steppe-a vast field of snow from horizon to horizon, while above it the sky was
nothing but a blue sheet of ice in which sat the red pool of the sun.
And, tireless as ever, the chimerae flew on.
Elric brought himself slowly from his trance and prayed to his untrustworthy gods that he remembered
the spell aright.
His lips were all but frozen together. He licked them and it was as if he licked snow. He opened them
and bitter air coursed into his mouth. He coughed then, turning his head upwards, his crimson eyes
glazing.
He forced his lips to frame strange syllables, to utter the old vowel-heavy words of the High Speech of
Old Melnibone, a speech hardly suited to a human tongue at all.
"Fileet," he murmured. Then he began to chant the incantation. And as he chanted the sword grew
warmer in his hand and supplied him with more energy so that the eldritch chant echoed through the icy
sky.
Feathers fine our fates entwined
Bird and man and thine and mine,
Formed a pact that Gods divine
Hallowed on an ancient shrine,
When kind swore service unto kind.
Fileet, fair feathered queen of flight Remember now that fateful night And help your brother in his
plight.
There was more to the summoning than the words of the invocation. There were the abstract thoughts in
the head, the visual images which had to be retained in the mind the whole time, the emotions felt, the
memories made sharp and true. Without everything being exactly right, the invocation would prove
useless.
Centuries before, the Sorcerer Kings of Melnibone had struck this bargain with Fileet, Lady of the Birds:
That any bird that settled in Imrryr's walls should be protected, that no bird would be shot by any of the
Melnibonean blood. This bargain had been kept and dreaming Imrryr had become a haven for all species
of bird and at one time they had cloaked her towers in plumage.
Now Elric chanted his verses, recalling that bargain and begging Fileet to remember her part of it.
Brothers and sisters of the sky
Hear my voice where'er ye fly
And bring me aid from kingdoms high...
Not for the first time had he called upon the elemen-tals and those akin to them. But lately he had summoned
Haaashaastaak, Lord of the Lizards, in his fight against Theleb K'aarna and still earlier he had
made use of the services of the wind elementals-the sylphs, the sharnahs and the h'Haarshanns-and the
earth elementals.
Yet, Fileet was fickle.
And now that Imrryr was no more than quaking ruins, she could even choose to forget that ancient pact.
"Fileet. ..."
He was weak from the invoking. He would not have the strength to battle Theleb K'aarna even if he
found the opportunity.
"Fileet. ..."
And then the air was stirring and a huge shadow fell across the chimerae bearing Elric and Moonglum
north-ward.
Elric's voice faltered as he looked up. But he smiled and said:
"I thank you, Fileet."
For the sky was black with birds. There were eagles and robins and rooks and starlings and wren and
kites and crows and hawks and peacocks and flamingoes and pigeons and parrots and doves and magpies
and ravens and owls. Their plumage flashed like steel and the air was full of their cries.
The Oonai raised its snake's head and hissed, its long tongue curling out between its front fangs, its
coiled tail lashing. One of the chimerae not carrying Elric or Moonglum changed its shape into that of a
gigantic condor and flapped up towards the vast array of birds.
But they were not deceived.
The chimera disappeared, submerged by birds. There was a frightful screaming and then something
black and piglike spiralled to earth, blood and entrails stream-ing in its wake.
Another chimera-the last not bearing a burden-assumed its dragon shape, almost completely identical to
those which Elric had once mastered as ruler of Melnibone, but larger and with not quite the same grace
as Flamefang and the others.
There was a sickening smell of burning flesh and feathers as the flaming venom fell upon Elric's allies.
But now more and more birds were filling the air, shrieking and whistling and cawing and hooting, a million
wings fluttering, and once again the Oonai was hidden from sight, once again a muffled scream
sounded, once again a mangled, piglike corpse plum-metted groundwards.
The birds divided into two masses, turning their at-tention to the chimerae bearing Elric and Moonglum.
They sped down like two gigantic arrowheads, led, each group, by ten huge golden eagles which dived at
the flashing eyes of the Oonai.
As the birds attacked, the chimerae were forced to
change shape. Instantly Elric felt himself fall free. His
body was numb and he fell like a stone, remembering only to keep his grip on Stormbringer, and as he
fell he cursed at the irony. He had been saved from the beasts of Chaos only to hurtle to his death on the
snow-covered ground below.
But then his cloak was caught from above and he hung swaying in the air. Looking up he saw that
several eagles had grasped his clothing in their claws and beaks and were slowing his descent so that he
struck the snow with little more than a painful bump.
The eagles flew back to the fray.
A few yards away Moonglum came down, deposited by another flight of eagles which immediately
returned to where their comrades were fighting the remaining Oonai.
Moonglum picked up the sword which had fallen from his hand. He rubbed his right calf. "I'll do my best
never to eat fowl again," he said feelingly. "So you remembered a spell, eh?"
"Aye."
Two more piglike corpses thudded down not far away.
For a few moments the birds performed a strange, wheeling dance in the sky, partly a salute to the two
men, partly a dance of triumph, and then they divided into their groups of species and flew rapidly away.
Soon there were no birds at all in the ice-blue sky.
Elric picked up his bruised body and stiffly he sheathed his sword Stormbringer. He drew a deep breath
and peered upwards.
"Fileet, I thank thee again."
Moonglum still seemed dazed. "How did you sum-mon them, Elric?"
Elric removed his helmet and wiped sweat from within the rim. In this clime that sweat would soon turn
to ice. "An ancient bargain my ancestors made. I was hard-pressed to remember the lines of the spell."
"I'm mightily pleased that you did remember!"
Absently, Elric nodded. He replaced his helmet on his head, staring about him as he did so.
Everywhere stretched the vast, snow-covered Lor-myrian steppe.
Moonglum understood Elric's thoughts. He rubbed his chin.
"Aye. We are fairly lost, Lord Elric. Have you any idea where we may be?"
"I do not know, friend Moonglum. We have no means of guessing how far those beasts carried us, but
I'm fairly sure it was well to the north of Iosaz. We are further away from the capital than we were. . . ."
"But then so must Theleb K'aarna be! If we were, indeed, being borne to where he dwells. . . ."
"It would be logical, I agree."
"So we continue north?"
"I think not."
"Why so?"
"For two reasons. It could be that Theleb K'aarna's idea was to take us to a place so far away from anywhere
that we could not interfere with his plans. That might be considered a wiser action than
confronting us and thus risking our turning the tables on him. . . ."
"Aye, I'll grant you that. And what's the other rea-son?"
"We would do better to try to make for Iosaz where we can replenish both our gear and our provisions
and enquire of Theleb K'aarna's whereabouts if he is not there. Also we would be foolish to strike further
north without good horses and in Iosaz we shall find horses and perhaps a sleigh to carry us the faster
across this snow."
"And I'll grant you the sense of that, too. But I do not think much of our chances in this snow, whichever
way we go."
"We must begin walking and hope that we can find a river that has not yet frozen over-and that the river
will have boats upon it which will bear us to Iosaz."
"A faint hope, Elric."
"Aye. A faint hope." Elric was already weakened
from the energy spent in the invocation to Fileet. He
knew that he must almost certainly die. He was not
sure that he cared overmuch. It would be a cleaner death than some he had been offered of late-a less
painful death than any he might expect at the hands of the sorcerer of Pan Tang.
They began to trudge through the snow. Slowly they headed south, two small figures in a frozen
landscape, two tiny specks of warm flesh in a great waste of ice.
CHAPTER FOUR
Old Castle Standing A lone
A day passed, a night passed.
Then the evening of the second day passed and the two men staggered on, for all that they had long since
lost their sense of direction.
Night fell and they crawled.
They could not speak. Their bones were stiff, their flesh and their muscles numb.
Cold and exhaustion drove the very sentience from them so that when they fell in the snow and lay
motion-less they were scarcely aware that they had ceased to move. They understood no difference now
between life and death, between existence and the cessation of ex-istence.
And when the sun rose and warmed their flesh a little they stirred and raised their heads, perhaps in an
effort to catch one last glimpse of the world they were leaving.
And they saw the castle,
It stood there in the middle of the steppe and it was ancient. Snow covered the moss and the lichen which
grew on its worn, old stones. It seemed to have been there for eternity, yet neither Elric nor Moonglum 
had ever heard of such a castle standing alone in the steppe. It was hard to imagine how a castle so old
could exist in the land once known as World's Edge.
Moonglum was the first to rise. He stumbled through the deep snow to where Elric lay. With chapped
hands he tried to lift his friend.
The tide of Elric's thin blood had almost ceased to
move in his body. He moaned as Moonglum helped
him to his feet. He tried to speak, but his lips were frozen shut.
Clutching each other, sometimes walking, sometimes crawling, they progressed towards the castle.
Its entrance stood open. They fell through it and the warmth issuing from the ulterior revived them sufficiently
to allow them to rise and stagger down a narrow passage into a great hall.
It was an empty hall.
It was completely bare of furnishings, save for a huge log fire that blazed in a hearth of granite and
quartz built at the far end of the hall. They crossed flagstones of lapis lazuli to reach it.
"So the castle is inhabited."
Moonglum's voice was harsh and thick in his mouth. He stared around him at the basalt walls. He raised
his voice as best he could and called:
"Greetings to whoever is the master of this hall. We are Moonglum of Elwher and Elric of Melnibone
and we crave your hospitality, for we are lost in your land."
And then Elric's knees buckled and he fell to the floor.
Moonglum stumbled towards him as the echoes of his voice died in the hall. All was silent save for the
crackling of the logs in the hearth.
Moonglum dragged Elric to the fire and lay him down near it.
"Warm your bones here, friend Elric. I'll seek the folk who live here."
Then he crossed the hall and ascended the stone stair leading to the next floor of the castle.
This floor was as bereft of furniture or decoration as the other. There were many rooms, but all of them
were empty. Moonglum began to feel uneasy, scenting something of the supernatural here. Could this be
Theleb K'aarna's castle?
For someone dwelt here, in truth. Someone had laid
the fire and had opened the gates so that they might
enter. And they had not left the castle in the ordinary
way or he should have noticed the tracks in the snow outside.
Moonglum paused, then turned and slowly began to descend the stairs. Reaching the hall, he saw that
Elric had revived enough to prop himself up against the chimneypiece.
"And-what-found you . . ." said Elric thickly.
Moonglum shrugged. "Nought. No servants. No mas-ter. If they have gone a-hunting, then they hunt on
flying beasts, for there are no signs of hoofprints in the snow outside. I am a little nervous, I must
admit." He smiled slightly. "Aye-and a little hungry, too. I'll seek the pantry. If danger comes, we'd do as
well to face it on full stomachs."
There was a door set back and to one side of the hearth. He tried the latch and it opened into a short
passage at the end of which was another door. He went down the passage, hand on sword, and opened
the door at the end. A parlour, as deserted as the rest of the castle. And beyond the parlour he saw the
castle's kitchens. He went through the kitchens, noting that there were cooking things here, all polished
and clean but none in use, and came finally to the pantry.
Here he found the best part of a large deer hanging and on the shelf above it were ranked many skins and
jars of wine. Below this shelf were bread and some pasties and below that spices.
Moonglum's first action was to reach up on tiptoe and take down a jar of wine, removing the cork and
sniffing the contents.
He had smelled nothing more delicate or delicious in his life.
He tasted the wine and he forgot his pain and his weariness. But he did not forget that Elric still waited in 
the hall.
With his short sword he cut off a haunch of vension and tucked it under his arm. He selected some spices
and put them into his belt-pouch. Under his other arm he put the bread and in both hands he carried a jar
of wine.
He returned to the hall, put down his spoils and helped Elric drink from the jar.
The strange wine worked almost instantly and Elric offered Moonglum a smile that had gratitude in it.
"You are-a good friend-I wonder why. . . ."
Moonglum turned away with an embarrassed grunt. He began to prepare the meat which he intended to
roast over the fire.
He had never understood his friendship with the al-bino. It had always been a peculiar mixture of reserve
and affection, a fine balance which both men were care-ful to maintain, even in situations of this kind.
Elric, since his passion for Cymoril had resulted in her death and the destruction of the city he loved, had
at all tunes feared bestowing any tender emotion on those he fell in with.
He had run away from Shaarilla of the Dancing Mist, who had loved him dearly. He had fled from
Queen Yishana of Jharkor, who had offered him her kingdom to rale, in spite of her subjects' hatred of
him. He dis-dained most company save Moonglum's, and Moon-glum, too, became quickly bored by
anyone other than the crimson-eyed Prince of Imrryr. Moonglum would die for Elric and he knew that
Elric would risk any danger to save his friend. But was not this an unhealthy relationship? Would it not
be better if they went their different ways? He could not bear the thought. It was as if they were part of
the same entity-different aspects of the character of the same man.
He could not understand why he should feel this. And he guessed that, if Elric had ever considered the
question, the Melnibonean would be equally hard put to find an answer.
He contemplated all this as he roasted the meat be-fore the fire, using his long sword as a spit.
Meanwhile Elric took another draft of wine and be-gan, almost visibly, to thaw out. His skin was still
badly blistered by chilblains, but both men had es-caped serious frostbite.
They ate the venison in silence, glancing around the
hall, puzzling over the non-appearance of the owner, yet too tired to care greatly where he was.
Then they slept, having put fresh logs on the fire, and in the morning they were almost completely
recovered from their ordeal in the snow.
They breakfasted on cold venison and pasties and wine.
Moonglum found a pot and heated water in it so that they might shave and wash and Elric found some
salve in his pouch which they could put on their blisters.
"I looked in the stables," Moonglum said as he shaved with the razor he had taken from his own pouch.
"But I found no horses. There are signs, however, that some beasts have been kept there recently."
"There is only one other way to travel," Elric said. "There might be skis somewhere in the castle. It is
the sort of thing you might expect to find, for there is snow in these parts for at least half the year. Skis
would speed our progress back towards Iosaz. As would a map and a lodestone if we could find one."
Moonglum agreed. "I'll search the upper levels." He finished his shaving, wiped his razor and replaced it
in his pouch.
Elric got up. "I'll go with you."
Through the empty rooms they wandered, but they found nothing.
"No gear of any kind." Elric frowned. "And yet there is a strong sense that the castle is inhabited-and evidence,
too, of course."
They searched two more floors and there was not even dust in the rooms.
"Well, perhaps we walk after all," Moonglum said in resignation. "Unless there was wood with which we
could manufacture skis of some kind. I might have seen some in the stables. ..."
They had reached a narrow stair which wound up the highest tower of the castle.
"We'll try this and then count our quest unsuccess-ful," Elric said.
And so they climbed the stair and came to a door at
the top which was half-open. Elric pushed it back and then he hesitated.
"What is it?" Moonglum, who was below him, asked.
"This room is furnished," Elric said quietly.
Moonglum ascended two more steps and peered round Elric's shoulder. He gasped.
"And occupied!"
It was a beautiful room. Through crystal windows came pale light which sparkled and fell on hangings of
many-coloured silk, on embroidered carpets and tapes-tries of hues so fresh they might have been made
only a moment before.
In the centre of this room was a bed, draped in er-mine, with a canopy of white silk.
And on the bed lay a young woman.
Her hair was black and it shone. Her gown was of the deepest scarlet. Her limbs were like rose-tinted
ivory and her face was very fair, the lips slightly parted as she breathed.
She was asleep.
Elric took two steps towards the woman on the bed and then he stopped suddenly. He was shuddering.
He turned away.
Moonglum was alarmed. He saw bright tears in El-ric's crimson eyes.
"What is it, friend Elric?"
Elric moved his white lips but was incapable of speech. Something like a groan came from his throat.
"Elric...."
Moonglum placed a hand on his friend's arm. Elric shook it off.
Slowly the albino turned again towards the bed, as if forcing himself to behold an impossibly horrifying
sight. He breathed deeply, straightening his back and resting his left hand on the pommel of his
sorcerous blade.
"Moonglum...."
He was forcing himself to speak. Moonglum glanced at the woman on the bed, glanced at Elric. Did he
recognise her?
"Moonglum-this is a sorcerous sleep...."
"How know you that?"
"It-it is a similar slumber to that in which my cousin Yyrkoon put my Cymoril. ..."
"Gods! Think you that. . . ?"
"I think nothing!"
"But it is not-"
"-it is not Cymoril. I know. I-she is like her-so like her. But unlike her, too. ... It is only that I could not
have expected. ..."
Elric bowed his head.
He spoke in a low voice. "Come, let's be gone from here."
"But she must be the owner of this castle. If we
awakened her we could-"
"She cannot be awakened by such as we. I told you, Moonglum. . . ." Elric drew another deep breath. "It
is an enchanted sleep she is in. I could not wake Cy-moril from it, with all my powers of sorcery. Unless
one has certain magical aids, some knowledge of the exact spell used, there is nothing that can be done.
Quickly, Moonglum, let us depart."
There was an edge to Elric's voice which made Moon-glum shiver.
"But..."
"Then I will go!"
Elric almost ran from the room. Moonglum heard his footsteps echoing rapidly down the long staircase.
He went up to the sleeping woman and stared down at her beauty.
He touched the skin. It was unnaturally cold. He
shrugged and made to leave the chamber, pausing for
a moment only to notice that a number of ancient battleshields
and weapons hung on one wall of the room, behind
the bed. Strange trophies with which a beautiful
woman should wish to decorate her bedroom, he
thought. He saw the carved wooden table below the
trophies. Something lay upon it. He stepped back into
the room. A peculiar sensation filled him as he saw
that it was a map. The castle was marked and so was the Zaphra-Trepek river.
Holding the map down to the table was a lodestone, set in silver on a long silver chain.
He grabbed the map in one hand and the lodestone in the other and ran from the room.
"Elric! Elric!"
He raced down the stairs and reached the hall. Elric had gone. The door of the hall was open.
He followed the albino out of the mysterious castle and into the snow.
"Elric!"
Elric turned, his face set and his eyes tormented.
Moonglum showed him the map and the lodestone.
"We are saved, after all, Elric!"
Elric looked down at the snow. "Aye. So we are."
CHAPTER FIVE
Doomed Lord Dreaming
And two days later they reached the upper reaches of the Zaphra-Trepek and the trading town of
Alorasaz with its towers of finely carved wood and its beautifully made timber houses.
To Alorasaz came the fur trappers and the miners, the merchants from Iosaz, downriver, or from afar as
Trepesaz on the coast. A cheerful, bustling town with its streets lit and heated by great, red braziers at
every corner. These were tended by citizens specially com-missiond to keep them burning hot and
bright. Wrapped in thick woollen clothing, they hailed Elric and Moon-glum as they entered the city.
For all they had been sustained by the wine and meat Moonglum had thought to bring, they were weary
from their walk across the steppe.
They made their way through the rumbustious crowd
-laughing, red-cheeked women and burly, fur-swathed men whose breath steamed in the air, mingling
with the smoke from the braziers, as they took huge swallows from gourds of beer or skins of wine,
conducting their business with the slightly less bucolic merchants of the more sophisticated townships.
Elric was looking for news and he knew that if he found it anywhere it would be in the taverns. He
waited while Moonglum followed his nose to the best of Alorasaz's inns and came back with the news of
where it could be found.
They walked a short distance and entered a rowdy
tavern crammed with big, wooden tables and benches on
which were jammed more traders and more merchants
all arguing cheerfully, holding up furs to display their quality or to mock their worthlessness, depending
on which point of view was taken.
Moonglum left Elric standing in the doorway and went to speak with the landlord, a hugely fat man with
a glistening scarlet face.
Elric saw the landlord bend and listen to Moonglum. The man nodded and raised an arm to bellow at
Elric to follow him and Moonglum.
Elric inched his way through the press and was knocked half off his feet by a gesticulating trader who
apologised cheerfully and profusely and offered to buy him a drink.
"It is nothing," Elric said faintly.
The man got up. "Come on, sir, it was my fault. . .." His voice tailed off as he saw the albino's face. He 
mumbled something and sat down again, making a wry remark to one of his companions.
Elric followed Moonglum and the landlord up a flight of swaying wooden stairs, along a landing and into
a private room which, the landlord told them, was all that was available.
"Such rooms as these are expensive during the winter market," the landlord said apologetically.
And Moonglum winced as, silently, Elric handed the man another precious ruby worth a small fortune.
The landlord looked at it carefully and then laughed. "This inn will have fallen down before your credit's
up, master. I thank thee. Trading must be good this sea-son! I'll have drink and viands sent up at once!"
"The finest you have, landlord," said Moonglum, try-ing to make the best of things.
"Aye-I wish I had better."
Elric sat down on one of the beds and removed his cloak and his sword-belt. The chill had not left his
bones.
"I wish you would give me charge of our wealth," Moonglum said as he removed his boots by the fire.
"We might have need of it before this quest is ended."
But Elric seemed not to hear him.
After they had eaten and discovered from the land-lord that a ship was leaving the day after tomorrow
for Iosaz, Elric and Moonglum went to their separate beds to sleep.
Elric's dreams were troubled that night. More than usual did phantoms come to walk the dark corridors
of his mind.
He saw Cymoril screaming as the Black Sword drank her soul. He saw Imrryr burning, her fine towers
crum-bling. He saw his cackling cousin Yyrkoon sprawling on the Ruby Throne. He saw other things
which could not possibly be part of his past. . . .
Never quite suited to be ruler of the cruel folk of Melnibone, Elric had wandered the lands of men only
to discover that he had no place there, either. And in the meantime Yyrkoon had usurped the kingship,
had tried to force Cymoril to be his and, when she refused, put her into a deep and sorcerous slumber
from which only he could wake her.
Now Elric dreamed that he had found a Nanorion, the mystic gem which could awaken even the dead.
He dreamed that Cymoril was still alive, but sleeping, and that he placed the Nanorion on her forehead
and that she woke up and kissed him and left Imrryr with him, sailing through the skies on Flamefang,
the great Melni-bonean battle dragon, away to a peaceful castle in the snow.
He awoke with a start.
It was the dead of night.
Even the noise from the tavern below had subsided.
He opened his eyes and saw Moonglum fast asleep in the next bed.
He tried to return to sleep, but it was impossible. He was sure that he could sense another presence in the
room. He reached out and gripped the hilt of Storm-bringer, prepared to defend himself should any
attackers strike at him. Perhaps it was thieves who had heard of his generosity towards the innkeeper?
He heard something move in the room and, again, he opened his eyes.
She was standing there, her black hair curling over her shoulders, her scarlet gown clinging to her body.
Her lips curved in a smile of irony and her eyes re-garded him steadily.
She was the woman he had seen in the castle. The sleeping woman. Was this part of the dream?
"Forgive me for thus intruding upon your slumber and your privacy, my lord, but my business is urgent
and I have little time to spare."
Elric saw that Moonglum still slept as if in a drugged slumber.
He sat upright in his bed. Stormbringer moaned softly and then was silent.
"You seem to know me, my lady, but I do not-"
"I am called Myshella. ..."
"Empress of the Dawn?"
She smiled again. "Some have named me that. And others have called me the Dark Lady of Kaneloon."
"Whom Aubec loved? Then you must have preserved your youth carefully, Lady Myshella."
"No doing of mine. It is possible that I am immortal. I do not know. I know only one thing and that is
that Time is a deception. . . ."
"Why do you come?"
"I cannot stay for long. I come to seek your aid."
"In what way?"
"We have an enemy in common, I believe."
"Theleb K'aarna?"
"The same."
"Did he place that enchantment upon you that made you sleep?"
"Aye."
"And he sent his Oonai against me. That is how-"
She raised her hand.
"I sent the chimerae to find you and bring you to me.
They meant you no harm. But it was the only thing I
could do, for Theleb K'aarna's spell was already beginning
to work. I battle his sorcery, but it is strong and I
am unable to revive myself for more than very short
periods. This is one such period. Theleb K'aarna has
joined forces with Prince Umbda, Lord of the Kelmain Hosts. Their plan is to conquer Lormyr and,
ultimately, the entire Southern world!"
"Who is this Umbda? I have heard neither of him nor of the Kelmain Hosts. Some noble of Iosaz,
perhaps, who ..."
"Prince Umbda serves Chaos. He comes from the lands beyond World's Edge and his Kelmain are not
men at all, though they have the appearance of men."
"So Theleb K'aarna was in the far south, after all."
"That is why I came to you tonight."
"You wish me to help you?"
"We both need Theleb K'aarna destroyed. His sor-cery is what enabled Prince Umbda to cross World's
Edge. Now that sorcery is strengthened by what Umbda brings-the friendship of Chaos. I protect Lormyr
and I serve Law. I know that you serve Chaos, yet I hope your hatred of Theleb K'aarna overcomes that
loyalty for the moment."
"Chaos has not served me, of late, lady, so I'll for-get that loyalty. I would have my vengeance on Theleb
K'aarna and if we can help each other in the matter, so much the better."
"Good."
She gasped then and her eyes glazed. When next she spoke it was with some difficulty.
"The enchantment is exerting its hold again. I have a steed for you near the town's north gate. It will bear
you to an island in the Boiling Sea. On that island is a palace called Ashaneloon. It is there that I have
dwelt of late, until I sensed Lormyr's danger . . ."
She pressed her hand to her brow and swayed.
". . . But Theleb K'aarna expected me to try to re-turn there and he placed a guardian at the palace's gate.
That guardian must be destroyed. When you have de-stroyed it you must go to the . . ."
Elric rose to help her, but she waved him away.
". . . to the eastern tower. In the tower's lower room is a chest. In the chest is a large pouch of cloth-ofgold.
You must take that and-and bring it back to Kaneloon,
for Umbda and his Kelmain now march against the castle. Theleb K'aarna will destroy the castle with
their help-and destroy me, also. With the pouch, I may destroy them. But pray that I am able to wake, or
the South is doomed and even you will not be able to go against the power that Theleb K'aarna will
wield."
"What of Moonglum?" Elric glanced at his sleeping friend. "Can he accompany me?"
"Best not. Besides, he has a light enchantment upon him. There is no time to wake him. . . ." She gasped
again and flung her arms across her forehead. "No time. ..."
Elric leaped from the bed and began to pull on his breeks. He took his cloak from where it was draped
across a stool and he buckled on his runesword. He went forward to help her, but she signalled him
away.
"No. ... Go, please. . . ."
And she vanished.
Still half asleep Elric flung open the door and dashed down the stairs, out into the night, racing for the
north gate of Alorosaz, passing through it and running on through the snow, looking this way and that.
The cold flooded over him like a sudden wave. He was soon knee-deep in snow. Peering about him he
carried on until he stopped in his tracks.
He gasped in astonishment when he saw the steed which Myshella had provided for him.
"What's this? Another chimera?"
He approached it cautiously.
CHAPTER SIX
Jewelled Bird Speaking
It was a bird, but it was not a bird of flesh and blood.
It was a bird of silver and of gold and of brass. Its wings clashed as he approached it and it moved its
huge clawed feet impatiently, turning cold, emerald eyes to regard him.
On its back was a saddle of carved onyx chased in gold and copper and the saddle was empty, awaiting
him.
"Well, I began all this unquestioningly," Elric said to himself. "I might as well complete it in the same
manner."
And he went up to the bird and he climbed up its side and he lowered himself somewhat cautiously into
the saddle.
The wings of gold and silver flapped with the sound of a hundred cymbals meeting and with three movements
had taken the bird of metal and its rider high up into the night sky above Alorosaz. It turned its
bright head on its neck of brass and it opened its curved beak of gem-studded steel.
"Well, master, I am commanded to take thee to Ash-analoon."
Elric waved a pale hand. "Wherever you will. I am at the mercy of you and your mistress."
And then he was jerked backward in the saddle as
the bird's wings beat the stronger and it gathered speed
and he was rushing through the freezing night, over
snowy plains, over mountains, over rivers, until the
coast came in sight and he saw the sea in the west which was called the Boiling Sea.
Down through the pitch blackness dropped the bird of gold and silver and now Elric felt damp heat strike
his face and hands, heard a peculiar bubbling sound, and he knew they were flying over that strange sea
said to be fed by volcanoes lying deep below its surface, a sea where no ships sailed.
Steam surrounded them now. Its heat was almost un-bearable, but through it Elric began to make out the
silhouette of a landmass, a small rocky island on which stood a single building and slender towers and
turrets and domes.
"The palace of Ashaneloon," said the bird of silver and gold. "I will alight among the battlements,
master, but I fear that thing you must meet before our errand is accomplished, so I will await you
elsewhere. Then, if you live, I will return to take you back to Kaneloon. And, if you die, I will go back
to tell my mistress of your failure."
Over the battlements the bird now hovered, its wings beating, and Elric reflected that there would be no
ad-vantage of surprise over whatever it was the bird feared so much.
He swung one leg from the saddle, paused, and then leapt down to the flat roof.
Hastily the bird retreated into the black sky.
Elric was alone.
All was silent, save for the drumming of warm waves on a distant shore.
He located the eastern tower and began to make his way towards the door. There was some chance, perhaps,
that he could complete his quest without the neces-sity of facing the palace's guardian.
But then a monstrous bellow sounded behind him and he wheeled, knowing that this must be the
guardian. A creature stood there, its red-rimmed eyes full of insen-sate malice.
"So you are Theleb K'aarna's slave," said Elric. He
reached for Stormbringer and the sword seemed to
spring into his hand at its own volition. "Must I kill you, or will you be gone now?"
The creature bellowed again, but it did not move.
The albino said: "I am Elric of Melnibone", last of a line of great sorcerer kings. This blade I wield will
do more than kill you, friend demon. It will drink your soul and feed it to me. Perhaps you have heard of
me by another name? By the name of the Soul Thief?"
The creature lashed its serrated tail and its bovine nostrils distended. The horned head swayed on the
short neck and the long teeth gleamed in the darkness. It reached out scaly claws and began to lumber
towards the Prince of Ruins.
Elric took the sword in both hands and spread his feet wide apart on the flagstones and prepared to meet
the monster's charge. Foul breath struck his face. An-other bellow and then it was upon him.
Stormbringer howled and spilled black radiance over both. The runes carved in the blade glowed with a
greedy glow as the thing of Hell slashed at Elric's body with its claws, ripping the shirt from him and
baring his chest.
The sword came down.
The demon roared as the scales of its shoulder re-ceived the blow but did not part. It danced to one side
and attacked again. Elric swayed back, but now a thin wound was opened in his arm from elbow to wrist.
Stormbringer struck for the second time and hit the demon's snout so that it shrieked and lashed out once
more. Again its claws found Elric's body and blood smeared his chest from a shallow cut.
Elric fell back, losing his footing on the stones. He almost went down, but recovered his balance and defended
himself as best he could. The claws slashed at him, but Stormbringer drove them to one side.
Elric began to pant and the sweat poured down his face and he felt desperation well in him and then that
desperation took a different quality and his eyes glowed and his lips snarled.
"Know you that I am Elric!" he cried. "Elric!"
Still the creature attacked.
"I am Elric-more demon than man! Begone, you ill-shaped thing!"
The creature bellowed and pounced and this time El-ric did not fall back, but, his face writhing in terrible
rage, reversed his grip on the runesword and plunged it point first into the demon's open jaws.
He plunged the Black Sword down the stinking throat, down into the torso.
He wrenched the blade so that it split jaw, neck, chest and groin and the creature's life force began to
course along the length of the runesword. The claws lashed out at him, but the creature was weakening.
Then the life force pulsed up the blade and reached Elric who gasped and screamed in dark ecstasy as the
demon's energy poured into him. He withdrew the blade and hacked and hacked at the body and still the
life-force flowed into him and gave greater power to his blows. The demon groaned and dropped to the
flag-stones.
And it was done.
And a white-faced demon stood over the dead thing of Hell and its crimson eyes blazed and its pale
mouth opened and it roared with wild laughter, flinging its arms upward, the runesword flaming with a
black and horrid flame, and it howled a wordless, exultant song to the Lords of Chaos.
There was silence suddenly.
And then it bowed its head and it wept.
Now Elric opened the door to the eastern tower and stumbled through absolute blackness until he came
to the lowest room. The door to the room was locked and barred, but Stormbringer smashed through it
and the Last Lord of Melnibone entered a lighted room in which squatted a chest of iron.
His sword sundered the bands securing the chest and
he flung open the lid and saw that there were many
wonders in the chest, as well as the pouch made from
cloth-of-gold, but he picked out only the pouch and
tucked it into his belt as he raced from the room, back to the battlements where the bird of silver and
gold stood pecking with its steel beak at the remnants of Theleb K'aarna's servant.
It looked up as Elric returned. In its eyes was an ex-pression almost of humour.
"Well, master, we must make haste to Kaneloon."
"Aye."
Nausea had begun to fill Elric. His eyes were gloomy as he contemplated the corpse and that which he
had stolen from it. Such life force, whatever else it was, must surely be tainted. Did not he drink
something of the demon's evil when his sword drank its soul?
He was about to climb back into the onyx saddle when he saw something gleaming amongst the black
and yellow entrails he had spilled. It was the demon's heart-an irregularly shaped stone of deep blue and
purple and green. It still pulsed, though its owner was dead.
Elric stooped and picked it up. It was wet and so hot that it almost burned his hand, but he tucked it into
his pouch, then mounted the bird of silver and gold.
His bone-white face flickered with a dozen strange emotions as he let the bird bear him back over the
Boil-ing Sea. His milk-white hair flew wildly behind him and he was oblivious of the wounds on his arm
and chest.
He was thinking of other things. Some of his thoughts lay in the past and others were in the future. And
he laughed bitterly twice and his eyes shed tears and he spoke once.
"Ah, what agony is this Life!"
CHAPTER SEVEN
Black Wizard Laughing
To Kaneloon they came in the early dawn and in the distance Elric saw a massive army darkening the
snow and he knew it must be the Kelmain Host, led by Theleb K'aarna and Prince Umbda, marching
against the lonely castle.
The bird of gold and silver flapped down in the snow outside the castle's entrance and Elric dismounted.
Then the bird had risen into the air again and was gone.
The great gate of Castle Kaneloon was closed this time and he gathered his tattered cloak about his
naked torso and he hammered on the gate with his fists and he forced a cry from his dry lips.
"Myshella! Myshella!"
There was no answer.
"Myshella! I have returned with that which you need!"
He feared she must have fallen into her enchanted slumber again. He looked towards the south and the
dark tide had rolled a little closer to the castle.
"Myshella!"
Then he heard a bar being drawn and the gates groaned open and there stood Moonglum, his face
strained and his eyes full of something of which he could not speak.
"Moonglum! How came you here?"
"I know not how, Elric." Moonglum stepped aside
so that Elric could enter. He replaced the bar. "I lay
in my bed last night when a woman came to me-the
same woman we saw, sleeping, here. She said I must
go with her. And somehow go I did. But I know not how, Elric. I know not how."
"And where is that woman?"
"Where we first saw her. She sleeps and I cannot wake her."
Elric drew a deep breath and told, briefly, what he knew of Myshella and the host that came against her
Castle Kaneloon.
"Do you know the contents of that pouch?" Moon-glum asked.
Elric shook his head and opened the pouch to peer inside. "It seems to be nothing but a pinkish dust. Yet
it must be some powerful sorcery if Myshella believes it can defeat the entire Kelmain Host."
Moonglum frowned. "But surely Myshella must work the charm herself if only she knows what it is?"
"Aye."
"And Theleb K'aarna has enchanted her."
"Aye."
"And now it is too late, for Umbda-whoever he may be-nears the castle."
"Aye." Elric's hand trembled as he drew from his belt the thing he had taken from the demon just before
he left the Palace of Ashaneloon. "Unless this is the stone I think it is."
"What is that?"
"I know a legend. Some demons possess these stones as hearts." He held it to the light so that the blues
and purples and greens writhed. "I have never seen one, but I believe it to be the thing I once sought for
Cymoril when I tried to lift my cousin's charm from her. What I sought but never found was a Nanorion.
A stone of magical powers said to be able to waken the dead-or those in deathlike sleep."
"And that is a Nanorion. It will awaken Myshella?"
"If anything can, then this will, for I took it from
Theleb K'aarna's own demon and that must improve
the efficaciousness of the magic. Come." Elric strode
through the hall and up the stairs until he came to
Myshella's room where she lay, as he had seen her
before, on the bed hung with draperies, her wall hung with shields and weapons.
"Now I understand why these arms decorate her chamber," Moonglum said. "According to legend, these
are the shields and weapons of all those who loved Myshella and championed her cause."
Elric nodded and said, as if to himself, "Aye, she was ever an enemy of Melnibone was the Empress of
the Dawn."
He held the pulsing stone delicately and reached out to place it on her forehead.
"It makes no difference," Moonglum said after a moment. "She does not stir."
"There is a rune, but I remember it not. . . ." Elric pressed his fingers to his temples. "I remember it not.
..."
Moonglum went to the window. "We can ask Theleb K'aarna, perhaps," he said ironically. "He will be
here soon enough."
Then Moonglum saw that there were tears again in Elric's eyes and that he had turned away, hoping
Moonglum would not see. Moonglum cleared his throat. "I have some business below. Call me if you
should require my help."
He left the room and closed the door and Elric was alone with the woman who seemed, increasingly, a
dreadful phantom from his most frightful dreams.
He controlled his feverish mind and tried to disci-pline it, to remember the crucial runes in the High
Speech of Old Melnibone.
"Gods!" he hissed. "Help me!"
But he knew that in this matter in particular the Lords of Chaos would not assist him-would hinder him if
they could, for Myshella was one of the chief instruments of Law upon the Earth, had been respon-sible
for driving Chaos from the world.
He fell to his knees beside her bed, bis hands clenched, his face twisting with the effort.
And then it came back to him. His head still bent,
he stretched out his right hand and touched the pulsing
stone, stretched out his left hand and rested it upon Myshella's navel, and he began a chant in an
ancient tongue that had been spoken before true men had ever walked the Earth. ...
"Elric!"
Moonglum burst into the room and Elric was wrenched from his trance.
"Elric! We are invaded! Their advance riders. . . ."
"What?"
"They have broken into the castle-a dozen of them. I fought them off and barred the way up to this
tower, but they are hacking at the door now. I think they have been sent to destroy Myshella if they
could. They were surprised to discover me here."
Elric rose and looked carefully down at Myshella. The rune was finished and had been repeated almost
through again when Moonglum had come in. She did not stir yet.
"Theleb K'aarna worked his sorcery from a dis-tance," Moonglum said. "Ensuring that Myshella would
not resist him. But he did not reckon with us."
He and Elric hurried from the room, down the steps to where a door was bulging and splintering beneath
the weapons of those beyond.
"Stand back, Moonglum."
Elric drew the crooning runesword, lifted it high and brought it against the door.
The door split and two oddly shaped skulls were split with it.
The remainder of the attackers fell back with cries of astonishment and horror as the white-faced reaver
fell upon them, his huge sword drinking their souls and singing its strange, undulating song.
Down the stairs Elric pursued them. Into the hall where they bunched together and prepared to defend
themselves from this demon with his hell-forged blade.
And Elric laughed.
And they shuddered.
And their weapons trembled in their hands.
"So you are the mighty Kelmain," Elric sneered. "No wonder you needed sorcery to aid you if you are
so cowardly. Have you not heard, beyond World's Edge, of Elric Kinslayer?"
But the Kelmain plainly did not understand his speech, which was strange enough in itself, for he had
spoken in the Common Tongue, known to all men.
These people had golden skins and eye-sockets that were almost square. Their faces, in all, seemed
crudely carved from rock, all sharp angles and planes, and their armour was not rounded, but angular.
Elric bared his teeth in a smile and the Kelmain drew closer together.
Then he screamed with dreadful laughter and Moon-glum stepped back and did not look at what took
place.
The runesword swung. Heads and limbs were chopped away. Blood gouted. Souls were taken. The
Kelmain's dead faces bore expressions showing that before the life was drawn from them they had
known the truth of their appalling fate.
And Stormbringer drank again, for Stormbringer was a thirsty hellsword.
And Elric felt his deficient veins swell with even more energy than that which he had taken earlier from
Theleb K'aarna's demon.
The hall shook with Elric's insane mirth and he strode over the piled corpses and he went through the
open gateway to where the great host waited.
And he shouted a name:
"Theleb K'aarna, Theleb K'aarna!"
Moonglum ran after him, calling for him to stop, but Elric did not heed him. Elric strode on through the
snow, his sword dripping a red trail behind him.
Under a cold sun, the Kelmain were riding for the castle called Kaneloon and Elric went to meet them.
At their head, on slender horses, rode the dark-faced
sorcerer of Pan Tang, dressed in flowing robes, and
beside him was the Prince of the Kelmain Host, Prince
Umbda, in proud armour, bizarre plumes nodding on
his helm, a triumphant smile on his strange, angular features.
Behind, the host dragged oddly-fashioned wargear which, for all its oddness, looked powerful-mightier
than anything Lormyr could rally when the huge army fell upon her.
As the lone figure appeared and began to walk away from the walls of Castle Kaneloon Theleb K'aarna
raised his hand and stopped the host's advance, reining in his own horse and laughing.
"Why, it is the jackal of Melnibone, by all the Gods of Chaos! He acknowledges his master at last and
comes to deliver himself up to me!"
Elric came closer and Theleb K'aarna laughed on.
"Here, Elric-kneel before me!"
Elric did not pause, seemed not to hear the Pan Tangian's words.
Prince Umbda's eyes were troubled and he said something in a strange tongue. Theleb K'aarna sniffed
and replied in the same language.
And still the albino marched through the snow towards the huge host.
"By Chardros, Elric, stop!" cried Theleb K'aarna, his horse shifting nervously beneath him. "If you have
come to bargain you are a fool. Kaneloon and her mistress must fall before Lormyr is ours-and Lormyr
shall be ours, there's no doubting that!"
Then Eric did stop and he brought up his eyes to burn into those of the sorcerer and there was a still, cold
smile upon his pale lips.
Theleb K'aarna tried to meet Elric's gaze but could not. His voice trembled when he next spoke.
"You cannot defeat the whole Kelmain Host!"
"I have no wish to, conjurer. Your life is all I de-sire."
The sorcerer's face twitched. "Well, you shall not have it! Hai, men of the Kelmain, take him!"
He wheeled his horse and rode into the protective ranks of his warriors, calling out his orders in their
own tongue.
From the castle another figure burst, rushing to join Elric.
It was Moonglum of Elwher, a sword in either hand.
Elric half-turned.
"Elric! We'll die together!"
"Stay back, Moonglum!"
Moonglum hesitated.
"Stay back, if you love me!"
Moonglum reluctantly retreated to the castle.
The Kelmain horsemen swept in, broad-bladed straight swords raised, instantly surrounding the albino.
They threatened him, hoping that he would lay down his sword and let himself be captured. But Elric
smiled.
Stormbringer began to sing. Elric grasped the sword in both hands, bent his elbows then suddenly held
the blade straight out before him.
He began to whirl like a Tarkeshite dancer, round and round, and it was as if the sword dragged him
faster and faster while it gouged and gashed and decapitated the Kelmain horsemen.
For a moment they fell back, leaving their dead com-rades heaped about the albino, but Prince Umbda,
after a hurried conference with Theleb K'aarna, urged them upon Elric again.
And Elric swung his blade once more, but not so many of the Kelmain perished this tune.
Armoured body fell against armoured body, blood mingled with brother's blood, horses dragged corpses
away with them across the snow and Elric did not fall, yet something was happening to him.
Then it dawned upon his berserker brain that, for some reason, his blade was sated. The energy still
pulsed in its metal, but it transferred nothing more to its mas-ter. And his own stolen energy was 
beginning to wane.
"Damn you, Stormbringer! Give me your power!"
Swords rained down upon him as he fought and slew and parried and thrust.
"More power!"
He was still stronger than normal and much stronger
than any ordinary mortal, but some of the wild anger
was leaving him and he felt almost puzzled as more Kelmain came at him.
He was beginning to waken from the blood-dream.
He shook his head and drew deep breaths. His back was aching.
"Give me their strength, Black Sword!"
He struck at legs and arms and chests and faces and he was covered from head to foot in the blood of bis
attackers.
But the dead now hampered him worse than the liv-ing, for their corpses were everywhere and he almost
lost his footing more than once.
"What ails you, runesword? Do you refuse to help me? Will you not fight these things because, like you,
they are of Chaos?"
No, it could not be that. All that had happened was that the sword desired no more vitality and therefore
gave Elric none.
He fought on for another hour before his grip on the sword weakened and a rider, half-mad with terror,
struck a blow at his head, failed to split it but stunned him so that he fell upon the bodies of the slain,
tried to rise, then was struck again and lost consciousness.
CHAPTER EIGHT
A Great Host Screaming
"It was more than I hoped," murmured
Theleb K'aarna in satisfaction, "but we have taken him alive!"
Elric opened his eyes and looked with hatred on the sorcerer who was stroking his black forked beard as
if to comfort himself.
Elric could barely remember the events which had brought him here and placed him in the sorcerer's
power. He remembered much blood, much laughter, much dying, but it was all fading, like the memory
of a dream.
"Well, renegade, your foolishness was unbelievable. I thought you must have an army behind you. But
doubtless it was your fear which unbalanced your poor brain. Still, I'll not speculate upon the cause of
my own good fortune. There's many a bargain I can strike with the denizens of other planes, were I to
offer them your soul. And your body I will keep for myself-to show Queen Yishana what I did to her
lover before he died. ..."
Elric laughed shortly and looked about him, ignoring Theleb K'aarna.
The Kelmain were awaiting orders. They had still not marched on Kaneloon. The sun was low in the sky.
He saw the pile of corpses behind him. He saw the hatred and fear on the faces of the golden-skinned
Host and he smiled again.
"I do not love Yishana," he said distantly, as if
scarcely aware of Theleb K'aarna's presence. "It is your
jealous heart that makes you think so. I left Yishana's
side to find you. It is never love that moves Elric of Melnibone, sorcerer, but always hatred."
"I do not believe you," Theleb K'aarna tittered. "When the whole South falls to me and my comrades,
then will I court Yishana and offer to make her Queen of all the West as well as all the South. Our forces
united, we shall dominate the Earth!"
"You Pan Tangians were ever an insecure breed, for-ever planning conquest for its own sake, forever
seeking to destroy the equilibrium of the Young Kingdoms."
"One day," sneered Theleb K'aarna, "Pan Tang will have an empire that will make the Bright Empire 
seem a mere flickering ember in the fire of history. But it is not for the glory of Pan Tang that I do this. .
. ."
"It is for Yishana? By the gods, sorcerer, then I am glad I'm motivated by hatred and not by love, for I do
not half the damage, it seems, done by those in love...."
"I will lay the south at Yishana's feet and she may use it as she pleases!"
"I am bored by this. What do you intend to do with me?"
"First I will hurt your body. I will hurt it delicately to begin with, building up the pain, until I have you in
the proper frame of mind. Then I will consort with the Lords of the Higher Planes to find which will give
me most for your soul."
"And what of Kaneloon?"
"The Kelmain will deal with Kaneloon. One knife is all that's needed now to slit Myshella's throat as she
sleeps."
"She is protected."
Theleb K'aarna's brow darkened. Then it cleared and he laughed again.
"Aye, but the gate will fall soon enough and your little redhaired friend will perish as Myshella
perishes."
He ran his fingers through his oiled ringlets.
"I am allowing, at Prince Umbda's request, the Kel-main to rest a while before storming the castle. But
Kaneloon will be burning by nightfall."
Elric looked towards the castle across the trampled
snow. Plainly his nines had failed to counter Theleb K'aarna's spell.
"I would. . . ." He began to speak when he paused.
He had seen a flash of gold and silver among the battlements and a thought without shape had entered
his head and made him hesitate.
"What?" Theleb K'aarna asked him harshly.
"Nothing. I merely wondered where my sword was."
The sorcerer shrugged. "Nowhere you can reach it, reaver. We left it where you dropped it. The stinking
hellblade is no use to us. And none to you, now. . . ."
Elric wondered what would happen if he made a direct appeal to the sword. He could not get to it himself,
for Theleb K'aarna had bound him tightly with ropes of silk, but he might call for it. ...
He lifted himself to his feet.
"Would you seek to run away, White Wolf?" The-leb K'aarna watched him nervously.
Elric smiled again. "I wished for a better view of the coming conquest of Kaneloon. Just that."
The sorcerer drew a curved knife.
Elric swayed, his eyes half-closed, and he began to murmur a name beneath his breath.
Theleb K'aarna leapt forward and his arm encircled Elric's head while the knife pricked into the albino's
throat. "Be silent, jackal!"
But Elric knew that he had no other means of helping himself and, for all it was a desperate scheme, he
mur-mured the words once more, praying that Theleb K'aarna's lust for a slow revenge would make the
sorcerer hesitate before killing him.
Theleb K'aarna cursed, trying to prise Elric's mouth open.
"The first thing I'll do is cut out that damned tongue of yours!"
Elric bit the hand and tasted the sorcerer's blood.
He spat it out.
Theleb K'aarna screamed. "By Chardros, if I did not wish to see you die over the months, I would . . ."
And then a sound came from the Kelmain.
It was a moan of surprise and it issued from every throat.
Theleb K'aarna turned and the breath hissed from between his clenched teeth.
Through the murky dusk a black shape moved. It was the sword, Stormbringer.
Elric had called it.
Now he cried aloud:
"Stormbringer! Stormbringer! To me!"
Theleb K'aarna flung Elric in the path of the sword and rushed into the security of the gathered ranks of
Kelmain warriors.
"Stormbringer!"
The black sword hovered in the air near Elric.
Another shout went up from the Kelmain. A shape had left the battlements of Castle Kaneloon.
Theleb K'aarna shouted in hysteria. "Prince Umbda! Prepare your men for the attack! I sense danger to
us!"
Umbda could not understand the sorcerer's words and Theleb K'aarna was forced to translate them.
"Do not let the sword reach him!" cried the sorcerer. Once more he shouted in the language of the
Kelmain and several warriors ran forward to grasp the rune-sword before it could reach its albino master.
But the sword struck rapidly and the Kelmain died and none dared approach it after that.
Slowly Stormbringer moved towards Elric.
"Ah, Elric," cried Theleb K'aarna, "if you escape me this day, I swear that I shall find you."
"And if you escape me," Elric shouted back, "I will find you, Theleb K'aarna. Be sure of that."
The shape that had left Castle Kaneloon had feathers of silver and gold. It flew high above the Host and
hovered for a moment before moving to the outer edges of the gathering. Elric could not see it clearly,
but he knew what it was. That was why he had sum-moned the sword, for he had an idea that Moonglum
rode the giant bird of metal and that the Elwherian would try to rescue him.
"Do not let it land! It comes to save the albino!" screamed Theleb K'aarna.
But the Kelmain Host did not understand him. Un-der Prince Umbda's commands they were preparing
themselves for the. attack upon the castle.
Theleb K'aarna repeated his orders in their own tongue, but it was plain they were beginning not to trust
him and could not see the need to bother them-selves with one man and a strange bird of metal. It could
not stop their engines of war. Neither could the man.
"Stormbringer," whispered Elric as the sword sliced through his bonds and gently settled in his hand.
Elric was free, but the Kelmain, though not placing the same importance upon him as did Theleb
K'aarna, showed that they were not prepared to let him escape now that the blade was in his grasp and
not moving of its own volition.
Prince Umbda shouted something.
A huge mass of warriors rushed at Elric at once and he made no effort to take the attack to them this time
for he was interested in fighting a defensive strategy until Moonglum could descend on the bird and help
him.
But the bird was even further away. It appeared to be circling the outer perimeters of the host and
showed no interest in his plight at all.
Had he been deceived?
He parried a dozen thrusts, letting the Kelmain war-riors crowd in upon each other and thus hamper themselves.
The bird of gold and silver was almost out of sight now.
And Theleb K'aarna-where was he?
Elric tried to find him, but the sorcerer was doubt-less somewhere in the centre of the Kelmain ranks by
now.
Elric killed a golden-skinned warrior, slitting his
throat with the point of the runesword. More strength
began to flow into him again. He killed another Kelmain
with an overarm movement which split the man's
shoulder. But nothing could be gained from this fight if Moonglum was not coming on the bird of silver
and gold.
The bird seemed to change course and come back towards Kaneloon. Was it merely waiting for instructions
from its sleeping mistress? Or was it refusing to obey Moonglum's commands?
Elric backed through the muddy, bloody snow so that the pile of corpses now lay behind him. He fought
on, but with very little hope.
The bird went past, far to his right.
Elric thought ironically that he had completely mis-taken the significance of the bird's leaving the castle
battlements and by mistiming his decision had merely brought his death closer-perhaps Myshella's and
Moonglum's deaths closer, too.
Kaneloon was doomed. Myshella was doomed. Lormyr and perhaps the whole of the Young King-doms
were doomed.
And he was doomed.
It was then that a shadow passed across the battling men and the Kelmain screamed and fell back as a
great din rent the air.
Elric looked up in relief, hearing the sound of the metal bird's clashing wings. He looked for Moonglum
in the saddle and saw instead the tense face of Myshella herself, her hair blowing around her face as it
was disturbed by the beating wings.
"Quickly, Lord Elric, before they close in again."
Elric sheathed the runesword and leapt towards the saddle, swinging himself behind the Sorceress of
Kane-loon. Then they rose into the air again, while arrows hurtled around their heads and bounced off
the bird's metal feathers.
"One more circuit of the Host and then we return to the castle," she said. "Your rune and the Nanorion
worked to defeat Theleb K'aarna's enchantment, but they took longer than either of us would have liked.
See, already Prince Umbda is ordering his men to
mount and ride to Castle Kaneloon. And Kaneloon has only Moonglum to defend her now."
"Why this circuit of Umbda's army?"
"You will see. At least, I hope you will see, my lord."
She began to sing a song. It was a strange, disturbing chant in a language not dissimilar to the
Melnibonean High Speech, yet different enough for Elric to under-stand only a few words, for it was
oddly accented.
Around the camp they flew. Elric saw the Kelmain form their ranks into battle order. Doubtless Umbda
and Theleb K'aarna had by now decided on the best mode of attack.
Then back to the castle beat the great bird, settling on the battlements and allowing Elric and Myshella to
dismount. Moonglum, his features taut, came running to meet them.
They went to look at the Kelmain.
And they saw that the Kelmain were on the move.
"What did you do to-" began Elric, but Myshella raised her hand.
"Perhaps I did nothing. Perhaps the sorcery will not work."
"What was it you . . . ?"
"I scattered the contents of the purse you brought.
I scattered it around their whole army. Watch. . . ."
"And if the spell has not worked-" Moonglum murmured. He paused, straining his eyes through the
gloom. "What is that?"
Myshella's satisfied tone was almost ghoulish as she said: "It is the Noose of Flesh."
Something was growing out of the snow. Something pink that quivered. Something huge. A great mass
that arose on all sides of the Kelmain and made their horses rear up and snort.
And it made the Kelmain shriek.
The stuff was like flesh and it had grown so high that the whole Kelmain Host was obscured from sight.
There were noises as they tried to train their battle-engines upon the stuff and blast their way through.
There were shouts. But not a single horseman broke out of the Noose of Flesh.
Then the substance began to fold in over the Kel-main and Elric heard a sound such as none he had heard
before.
It was a voice.
A voice of a hundred thousand men all facing an identical terror, all dying an identical death.
It was a moan of desperation, of hopelessness, of fear.
But it was a moan so loud that it shook the walls of Castle Kaneloon.
"It is no death for a warrior," murmured Moonglum, turning away.
"But it was the only weapon we had," said Myshella. "I have possessed it for a good many years but
never before did I feel the need to use it."
"Of them all, only Theleb K'aarna deserved that death," said Elric.
Night fell and the Noose of Flesh tightened around the Kelmain Host, crushing all but a few horses
which had run free as the sorcery began to work.
It crushed Prince Umbda, who spoke no language known in the Young Kingdoms, who spoke no language
known to the ancients, who had come to conquer from beyond the World's Edge.
It crushed Theleb K'aarna, who had sought, for the sake of his love for a wanton Queen, to conquer the
world with the aid of Chaos.
It crushed all the warriors of that near-human race, the Kelmain. And it crushed all who could have told
the watchers what the Kelmain had been or from where they had originated.
Then it absorbed them. Then it flickered and dis-solved and was dust again.
No piece of flesh-man's nor beast's-remained. But over the snow was scattered clothing, arms, ar-mour,
siege engines, riding accoutrements, coins, belt-buckles, for as far as the eye could see.
Myshella nodded to herself. "That was the Noose of
Flesh," she said. "I thank you for bringing it to me, Elric. I thank you, also, for finding the stone which
revived me. I thank you for saving Lormyr."
"Aye," said Elric. "Thank me." There was a weari-ness on him now. He turned away, shivering.
Snow had begun to fall again.
"Thank me for nothing, Lady Myshella. What I did was to satisfy my own dark urges, to sate my thirst
for vengeance. I have destroyed Theleb K'aarna. The rest was incidental. I care nought for Lormyr, the
Young Kingdoms, or any of your causes. ..."
Moonglum saw that Myshella had a sceptical look in her eyes and she smiled slightly.
Elric entered the castle and began to descend the steps to the hall.
"Wait," Myshella said. "This castle is magical. It reflects the desires of any who enter it-should I wish
it."
Elric rubbed at his eyes. "Then plainly we have no desires. Mine are satisfied now that Theleb K'aarna is
destroyed. I would leave this place now, my lady."
"You have none?" said she.
He looked at her directly. He frowned. "Regret breeds weakness. Regret achieves nothing. Regret is like
a disease which attacks the internal organs and at last destroys. . . ."
"And you have no desires?"
He hesitated. "I understand you. Your own appear-ance, I'll admit. . . ." He shrugged. "But are you-?"
She spread her hands. "Do not ask too many ques-tions of me." She made another gesture. "Now. See.
This castle becomes what you most desire. And in it, the things you most desire!"
And Elric looked about him, his eyes widening, and he began to scream.
He fell to his knees in terror. He turned pleadingly to her.
"No, Myshella! No. I do not desire this!"
Hastily she made yet another sign.
Moonglum helped his friend to his feet. "What was it? What did you see?"
Elric straightened his back and rested his hand on his sword and said grimly and quietly to Myshella:
"Lady, I would kill you for that if I did not under-stand you sought only to please me."
He studied the ground for a moment before contin-uing:
"Know this. Elric cannot have what he desires most. What he desires does not exist. What he desires is
dead. All Elric has is sorrow, guilt, malice, hatred. This is all he deserves and all he will ever desire."
She put her hands to her own face and walked back to the room where he had first seen her. Elric
followed.
Moonglum started after them but then he stopped and remained where he stood.
He watched them enter the room and saw the door close.
He walked back on to the battlements and stared into the darkness. He saw wings of silver and gold
flashing in the moonlight and they became smaller and smaller until they had vanished.
He sighed. It was cold.
He went back into the castle and settled himself with his back against a pillar, preparing to sleep.
But a little while later he heard laughter come from the room in the highest tower.
And the laughter sent him running through the pas-sages, through the great hall where the fire had died,
out of the door, into the night to seek the stables where he could feel more secure.
But he could not sleep that night, for the distant laughter still pursued him.
And the laughter continued until morning.
BOOK TWO
To Snare the Pale Prince
"... but it was in Nadsokor, City of
Beggars, that Elric found an old
friend and learned something concerning
an old enemy ..."
-The Chronicle of the Black Sword
CHAPTER ONE
The Beggar Court
Nadsokor, city of Beggars, was infamous throughout the Young Kingdoms. Lying near the shores of that
ferocious river, the Varkalk, and not too far from the Kingdom of Org in which blossomed the frightful
Forest of Troos, and exuding a stink which seemed thick enough ten miles distant, Nadsokor was
plagued by few visitors.
From this unlovely place sallied out her citizens to beg their way about the world and steal what they
could and bring it back to Nadsokor where half of their profits were handed over to their king in return
for his protection.
Their king had ruled for many years. He was called Urish the Seven-fingered, for he had but four fingers
on his right hand and three upon his left. Veins had burst all over his once handsome face and filthy, infested
hair framed that seedy countenance upon which age and grime had traced a thousand lines. From
out of all this ruin peered two bright, pale eyes.
As the symbol of his power Urish had a great cleaver called Hackmeat which was forever at his side. His
throne was of crudely carved black oak, studded with bits of raw gold, bones and semi-precious gems.
Be-neath this throne was Urish's Hoard-a chest of trea-sure which he let none but himself look upon.
For the best part of every day Urish would lounge on his throne, presiding over a gloomy, festering hall
throned with his Court: a rabble of rascals too foul in appearance and disposition to be tolerated
anywhere but here.
For heat and light there burned permanently braziers of garbage which gave out oily smoke and a stink
which dominated all the other stinks in the hall.
And now there was a visitor at Urish's Court.
He stood before the dais on which the throne was mounted and from time to time he raised a heavily
scented kerchief to his red, full lips.
His face, which was normally dark in complexion, was somewhat grey and his eyes had something of a
haunted, tortured look in them as they glanced from begrimed beggar to pile of rubbish to guttering
brazier. Dressed in the loose brocade robes of the folk of Pan Tang, the visitor had black eyes, a great
hooked nose, blue-black ringlets and a curling beard. Kerchief to mouth, he bowed low when he reached
Urish's throne.
As always, greed, weakness and malice mingled to form King Urish's expression as he regarded the
stranger whom one of his courtiers had but lately an-nounced.
Urish had recognised the name and he believed he could guess the Pan Tangian's business here.
"I heard you were dead, Theleb K'aarna-killed be-yond Lormyr, near World's Edge." Urish grinned to
display the black crags which were the rotting remains of his teeth.
Theleb K'aarna removed the kerchief from his lips and his voice was strangled at first, gaining strength
as he remembered the wrongs recently done him. "My magic is not so weak I cannot escape a spell such
as was woven that day. I conjured myself below the ground while Myshella's Noose of Flesh engulfed
the Kelmain Host."
Urish's disgusting grin widened.
"You crept into a hole, is that it?"
The sorcerer's eyes burned fiercely. "I'll not dispute
the strength of my powers with-"
He broke off and drew a deep breath which he at
once regretted. He stared warily around him at the
Beggar Court, all manged and maimed, which had deposited
itself about the filthy hall, mocking him. The beggars of Nadsokor knew the power of poverty
and disease-knew how it terrified those who were not used to it. And thus their very squalor was their
safe-guard against intruders.
A repulsive cough which might have been a laugh now seized King Urish. "And was it your magic that
brought you here?" As his whole body shook his blood-shot eyes continued, beadily, to regard the
sorcerer.
"I have travelled across the seas and all across Vilmir to be here," Theleb K'aarna said, "because I had
heard there was one you hated above all others. . . ."
"And we hate all others-all who are not beggars," Urish reminded him. The king chuckled and the
chuckle became, once more, a throaty, convulsive cough.
"But you hate Elric of Melnibone most."
"Aye. It would be fair to say that. Before he won fame as the Kinslayer, the traitor of Imrryr, he came to
Nadsokor to deceive us, disguised as a leper who had begged his way from the Eastlands beyond
Karlaak. He tricked me disgracefully and stole something from my Hoard. And my Hoard is sacred-I
will not let another even glimpse it!"
"I heard he stole a scroll from you," Theleb K'aarna said. "A spell which had once belonged to his cousin
Yyrkoon. Yyrkoon wished to be rid of Elric and let him believe that the spell would release the Princess
Cymoril from her sorcerous slumber. . . ."
"Aye. Yyrkoon had given the scroll to one of our citizens when he went a-begging to the gates of Imrryr.
He then told Elric what he had done. Elric disguised himself and came here. With the aid of sorcery he
gained access to my Hoard-my sacred Hoard-and plucked the scroll from it. . . ."
Theleb K'aarna looked sideways at the Beggar King. "Some would say that it was not Elric's fault-that
Yyrkoon was to blame. He deceived you both. The spell did not awaken Cymoril, did it?"
"No. But we have a Law in Nadsokor. . ." Urish
raised the great cleaver Hackmeat and displayed its
ragged, rusty blade. For all its battered appearance, it was a fearsome weapon. "That Law says that any
man who looks upon the sacred Hoard of King Urish must die and die most horribly-at the hands of the
Burning God!"
"And none of your wandering citizens have yet man-aged to take this vengeance?"
"I must pass the sentence personally upon him be-fore he dies. He must come again to Nadsokor, for it is
only here that he may be acquainted with his doom."
Theleb K'aarna said: "I have no love for Elric."
Urish once more voiced the sound that was half laugh, half wheezing cough. "Aye-I have heard he has
chased you all across the Young Kingdoms, that you have brought more and more powerful sorceries
against him, yet every time he has defeated you."
Theleb K'aarna frowned. "Have a care, King Urish. I have had bad luck, yet I am still one of Pan Tang's
greatest sorcerers."
"But you spend your powers freely and claim much from the Lords of Chaos. One day they will be tired
of helping you and find another to do their work." King Urish closed soiled lips over black teeth. His
pale eyes did not blink as he studied Theleb K'aarna.
There were stirrings in the hall, the Beggar Court moved in closer: the click of a crutch, the scrape of a
staff, the shuffle of misshapen feet. Even the oily smoke from the braziers seemed to menace him as it
drifted reluctantly into the darkness of the roof.
King Urish put one hand upon Hackmeat and the other upon his chin. Broken nails caressed stubble.
From somewhere behind Theleb K'aarna a beggar woman let forth an obscene noise and then giggled.
Almost as if to comfort himself the sorcerer placed the scented kerchief firmly over his mouth and
nostrils. He began to draw himself up, prepared to deal with an attack if it came.
"But you still have your powers now, I take it," said Urish suddenly, breaking the tension. "Or you would
not be here."
"My powers increase. . . ."
"For the moment, perhaps."
"My powers . . ."
"I take it you come with a scheme which you hope will result in Elric's destruction," continued Urish
easily. The beggars relaxed. Only Theleb K'aarna now showed any signs of discomfort. Urish's bright,
blood-shot eyes were sardonic. "And you desire our help because you know we hate the white-faced
reaver of Melnibone."
Theleb K'aarna nodded. "Would you hear the details of my plan?"
Urish shrugged. "Why not? At least they may be entertaining."
Unhappily, Theleb K'aarna looked about him at the corrupt and tittering crew. He wished he knew a spell
which would disperse the stink.
He took a deep breath through his kerchief and then began to speak. ...
CHAPTER TWO
The Stolen Ring
On the other side of the tavern the young dandy pretended to order another skin of wine while actually
taking a sly look towards the corner where Elric sat.
Then the dandy leaned towards his compatriots-merchants and young nobles of several nations-and
continued his murmured discourse.
The subject of that discourse, Elric knew, was Elric. Normally he was disdainful of such behaviour, but
he was weary and he was impatient for Moonglum to re-turn. He was almost tempted to order the young
dandy to desist, if only to pass the time.
Elric was beginning to regret his decision to visit Old Hrolmar.
This rich city was a great meeting place for all the imaginative people of the Young Kingdoms. To it
came explorers, adventurers, mercenaries, craftsmen, mer-chants, painters and poets for, under the rule
of the famous Duke Avan Astran, this Vilmirian city state was undergoing a transformation in its
character.
Duke Avan was himself a man who had explored most of the world and had brought back great wealth
and knowledge to Old Hrolmar. Its riches and its in-tellectual life attracted more riches, more 
intellectuals and so Old Hrolmar flourished.
But where riches are and where intellectuals are, then
gossip also flourishes, for if there is any breed of man
who gossips more than the merchant or the sailor then
it is the poet and the painter. And, naturally enough,
there was much gossip concerning the doom-driven
albino, Elric, already a hero of several ballads by poets not over-talented.
Elric had allowed himself to be brought to the city because Moonglum had said it was the best place to
find an income. Elric's carelessness with their wealth had made near-paupers of them, not for the first
time, and they were in need of provisions and fresh steeds.
Elric had been for skirting Old Hrolmar and riding on towards Tanelorn, where they had decided to go,
but Moonglum had argued reasonably that they would need better horses and more food and equipment
for the long ride across the Vilmirian and Ilmioran plains to the edge of the Sighing Desert, where
mysterious Tane-lorn was situated. So Elric had at last agreed, though, after his encounter with Myshella
and his witnessing of the destruction of the Noose of Flesh, he had become weary and craved for the
peace which Tanelorn offered.
What made things worse was that this tavern was rather too well-lit and catering too much to the better
end of the trade for Elric's taste. He would have preferred a lowlier sort of inn which would have been
cheaper and where men were used to holding back their questions and their gossip. But Moonglum had
thought it wise to spend the last of their wealth on a good inn, in case they should need to entertain
someone. . . .
Elric left the business of raising treasure to Moon-glum. Doubtless he intended to get it by thievery or
trickery, but Elric did not care.
He sighed and suffered the sidelong looks of the other guests and tried not to overhear the young dandy.
He sipped his cup of wine and picked at the flesh of the cold fowl Moonglum had ordered before he went
off.
He drew his head into the high collar of his black cloak,
but succeeded only in emphasising the bone-white
pallor of his face and the milky whiteness of his long
hair. He looked around him at the silks and furs and
tapestries swirling about the tavern as their owners
moved from table to table and he longed with all his
heart to be on his way to Tanelorn, where men spoke little because they had experienced so much.
". . . killed mother and father, too-and the mother's lover, it is said. . . ."
". . . and they say he lies with corpses for preference. ..."
". , . and because of that the Lords of the Higher Worlds cursed him with the face of a corpse. . . ."
"Incest, was it not? I got it from one who sailed with him that . . ."
". . . and his mother had congress with Arioch him-self, thus producing . . ."
". . . shortly before he betrayed his own people to Smiorgan and the rest!"
"He looks a gloomy fellow, right enough. Not one to enjoy a jest. . . ."
Laughter.
Elric made himself relax in his chair and swallow more wine. But the gossip went on.
"They say also that he is an imposter. That the real Elric died at Imrryr. . . ."
"A true prince of Melnibone would dress in more lavish style. And he would ..."
More laughter.
Elric stood up, pushing back his cloak so that the great black broadsword at his hip was fully displayed.
Most people in Old Hrolmar had heard of the rune-sword Stormbringer and its terrible power.
Elric crossed to the table where the young dandy sat.
"I pray you, gentlemen, to improve your sport! You can do much better now-for here is one who would 
offer you proof of certain things of which you speak. What of his penchant for vampirism of a particular
sort? I did not hear you touch upon that in your con-versation."
The young dandy cleared his throat and made a nervous little flirt of his shoulder.
"Well?" Elric feigned an innocent expression. "Can-not I be of assistance?"
The gossips had become dumb, pretending to be absorbed in their eating and drinking.
Elric smiled a smile which set their hands to shaking.
"I desire only to know what you wish to hear, gentlemen. Then I will demonstrate that I am truly the one
you have called Elric Kinslayer."
The merchants and the nobles gathered their rich robes about them and, avoiding his eye, got up. The
young dandy minced towards the exit-a parody of bravado.
But now Elric stood laughing in the doorway, his hand on the hilt of Stormbringer. "Will you not join me
as my guests, gentlemen? Think how you could tell your friends of the meeting. . . ."
"Gods, how boorish!" lisped the young dandy and then shivered.
"Sir, we meant no harm . . ." thickly said a fat Shazarian herb trader.
"We spoke of another." A young noble with only the hint of a chin, but with an emphatic moustache,
offered a feeble, placatory grin.
"We said how much we admired you . . ." stuttered a Vilmirian knight whose eyes appeared but recently
to have crossed and whose face was now almost as pale as Elric's.
A merchant in the dark brocades of Tarkesh licked his red lips and attempted to conduct himself with
more dignity than his friends. "Sir, Old Hrolmar is a civilised city. Gentlemen do not brawl amongst
themselves here. . . ."
"But like peasant women prefer to gossip," said Elric.
"Yes," said the youth with the abundance of mous-tache. "Ah-no. ..."
The dandy arranged his cloak about him and glow-ered at the floor.
Elric stepped aside. Uncertainly the Tarkeshite merchant
moved forward and then ran for the darkness of
the street, his companions tumbling behind him. Elric
heard their footsteps running on the cobbles and he
began to laugh. At the sound of his laugh the footfalls became a scamper and the party had soon reached
the quayside where the water gleamed, turned a corner and disappeared.
Elric smiled and looked up beyond Old Hrolmar's baroque skyline at the stars. Now there were more
footsteps coming from the other end of the street. He turned and saw the newcomers step into a pool of
light thrown from the window of a nearby office.
It was Moonglum. The stocky Eastlander was return-ing in the company of two women who were
scantily dressed and heavily painted and who were without doubt Vilmirian whores from the other side
of city. Moonglum had an arm about each waist and he was singing some obscure but evidently
disgraceful ballad, pausing frequently to have one of the laughing girls pour wine down his throat. Both
the whores had large stone flasks in their free hands and they were matching Moonglum drink for drink.
As Moonglum stepped unsteadily nearer he recog-nised Elric and hailed him, winking. "You see I have
not forgotten you, Prince of Melnibone. One of these beauties is for you!"
Elric made an exaggerated bow. "You are very good to me. But I thought you planned to find some gold
for us. Was that not the reason for coming to Old Hrolmar?"
"Aye!" Moonglum kissed the cheeks of the girls. They snorted with laughter. "Indeed! Gold it is-or
something as good as gold. I have rescued these young ladies from a cruel whoremaster on the other side
of town. I have promised to sell them to a kinder master and they are grateful to me!"
"You stole these slaves?"
"If you wish to say so-I 'stole' them. Aye, then, 'steal' I did. I stole in with my steel and I released them
from a life of degradation. A humanitarian deed. Their miserable life is no more! They may look forward
to ..."
"Their miserable lives will be no more-as, Indeed,
will be ours when the whoremaster discovers the crime and alerts the watch. How found you these
ladies?"
"They found me! I had made my swords available to an old merchant, a stranger to the city. I was to
escort him about the murkier regions of Old Hrolmar in return for a good purse of gold (better, I think,
than he expected to give me). While he whored above, as he could, I had a drink or two below in the
public rooms. These two beauties look a liking to me and told me of their unhappiness. It was enough. I
rescued them."
"A cunning plan," Elric said sardonically.
" 'Twas theirs! They have brains as well as-"
"I'll help you carry them back to their master before the city guards descend upon us."
"But Elric!"
"But first . . ." Elric seized his friend and threw him over his shoulder, staggering with him to the quay at
the end of the street, taking a good hold on his collar and lowering him suddenly into the reeking water.
Then he hauled him up and stood him down. Moonglum shivered and looked sadly at Elric.
"I am prone to colds, as you know."
"And prone to drunken plans, too! We are not liked here, Moonglum. The watch needs only one excuse
to set upon us. At best we should have to flee the city before our business was done. At worst we shall be
disarmed, imprisoned, perhaps slain."
They began to walk back to where the two girls still stood. One of the girls ran forward and knelt to take
Elric's hand and press her lips against his thigh. "Mas-ter, I have a message. . . ."
Elric bent to raise her to her feet.
She screamed. Her painted eyes widened. He stared
at her in astonishment and then, following her gaze,
turned and saw the pack of bravos who had stolen
round the corner and were now rushing at himself
and Moonglum. Behind the bravos Elric thought he
saw the young dandy he had earlier chased from the
tavern. The dandy wished for revenge. Poignards glittered
in the darkness and their owners wore the black hoods of professional assassins. There were at least
a dozen of them. The young dandy must therefore be extremely rich, for assassins were expensive in Old
Hrolmar.
Moonglum had already drawn both his swords and was engaging the leader. Elric pushed the frightened
girl behind him and put his hand to Stormbringer's pommel. Almost at its own volition the huge
runesword sprang from its scabbard and black light poured from its blade as it began to hum its own
strange battle-cry.
He heard one of the assassins gasp "Elric!" and guessed that the dandy had not made it plain whom they
were to slay. He blocked the thrust of the slim longsword, turned it and chopped with a kind of deli-cacy
at the owner's wrist. Wrist and sword flew into the shadows and the owner staggered back screaming.
More swords now and more cold eyes glittering from the black hoods. Stormbringer sang its peculiar
song-half-lament, half-victory shout. Elric's own face was alive with battle-lust and his crimson eyes
blazed from his bone-white face as he swung this way and that.
Shouts, curses, the screams of women and the groans of men, steel striking steel, boots on cobbles, the
sounds of swords in flesh, of blades scraping bone. A confusion through which Elric fought, his
broadsword clapped in both pale hands. He had lost sight of Moonglum and prayed that the Eastlander
still stood. From time to time he glimpsed one of the girls and wondered why she had not run for safety.
Now the corpses of several hooded assassins lay upon the cobbles and the remainder were beginning to
falter as Elric pressed them. They knew the power of his sword and what it did to those it struck. They
had seen their comrades' faces as their souls were drawn from them by the hellblade. With every death 
Elric seemed to grow stronger and the black radiance from the blade seemed to burn fiercer. And now
the albino was laugh-ing.
His laughter rang over the rooftops of Old Hrolmar
and those who were abed covered their ears, believing themselves in the grip of nightmares.
"Come, friends, my blade still hungers!"
An assassin made to stand his ground and Elric swept the Black Sword up. The man raised his blade to
protect his head and Elric brought the Black Sword down. It sheared through the steel and cut down
through the hood, through the neck, through the breast-bone. It clove the assassin completely in two and
it stayed in the flesh, feasting, drawing out the last traces of the man's dark soul. And then the rest were
running.
Elric drew a deep breath, avoided looking at the man his sword had slain last, sheathed the blade and
turned to look for Moonglum.
It was then that the blow came on the back of his neck. He felt nausea rise in him and tried to shake it
off. He felt a prick in his wrist and through the haze he saw a figure he thought at first was Moonglum.
But it was another-perhaps a woman. She was tugging at his left hand. Where did she want him to go?
His knees became weak and he fell to the cobbles. He tried to call out, but failed. The woman was still
tugging at his hand as if she sought to take him to safety. But he could not follow her. He fell on his
shoulder, then on his back, glimpsed a swimming sky . . .
... and then the dawn was rising over the crazy spires of Old Hrolmar and he realised that several hours
had passed since he had fought the assassins.
Moonglum's face appeared. It was full of concern.
"Moonglum?"
"Thank Elwher's gentle gods! I thought you slain by that poisoned blade."
Elric's head was clearing rapidly now. He rose to a sitting position. "The attacker came from behind.
How . . . ?"
Moonglum looked embarrassed. "I fear those girls were not all they seemed."
Elric remembered the woman tugging at his left hand
and he stretched out his fingers. "Moonglum! The Ring of Kings is gone from my hand! The Actorios
has been stolen!"
The Ring of Kings had been worn by Elric's fore-fathers for centuries. It had been the symbol of their
power, the source of much of their supernatural strength.
Moonglum's face clouded. "I thought I stole the girls. But they were thieves. They planned to rob us. An
old trick."
"There's more to it, Moonglum. They stole nothing else. Just the Ring of Kings. There's still a little gold
left in my purse." He jingled his belt pouch, climbing to his feet.
Moonglum jerked his thumb at the street's far wall. There lay one of the girls, her finery all smeared
with mud and blood.
"She got in the way of one of the assassins as we fought. She's been dying all night-mumbling your
name. I had not told it to her. Therefore I fear you're right. They were sent to steal that ring from you. I
was duped by them."
Elric walked rapidly to where the girl lay and he kneeled down beside her. Gently he touched her cheek.
She opened her lids and stared at him from glazed eyes.
Her lips formed Ms name.
"Why did you plan to rob me?" Elric asked. "Who is your master?"
"Urish . . ." she said in a voice that was a breeze passing through the grass. "Steal ring . . . take it to
Nadsokor. . . ."
Moonglum now stood on the other side of the dying girl. He had found one of the wine flasks and he
bent to give her a drink. She tried to sip the wine but failed. It ran down her little chin, down her slim
neck and on to her wounded breast.
"You are one of the beggars of Nadsokor?" Moon-glum said.
Faintly, she nodded,
"Urish has always been my enemy," Elric told him.
"I once recovered some property from him and he has never forgiven me. Perhaps he sought the Actorios
ring in payment." He looked down at the girl. "Your companion-has she returned to Nadsokor?"
Again the girl seemed to nod. Then all intelligence left the eyes, the lids closed and she ceased to
breathe.
Elric got up. He was frowning, rubbing at the hand on which the Ring of Kings had been.
"Let him keep the ring, then," said Moonglum hope-fully. "He will be satisfied."
Elric shook his head.
Moonglum cleared his throat. "A caravan is leaving Jadmar in a week. It is commanded by Rackhir of
Tanelorn and has been purchasing provisions for the city. If we took a ship round the coast we could
soon be in Jadmar, join Rackhir's caravan and be on our way to Tanelorn in good company. As you
know, it's rare for anyone of Tanelorn to make such a journey. We are lucky, for . . ."
"No," said Elric in a low voice. "We must forget Tanelorn for the moment, Moonglum, The Ring of
Kings is my link with my fathers. More-it aids my conjurings and has saved our lives more than once.
We ride for Nadsokor now. I must try to reach the girl before she gets to the City of Beggars. Failing
that, I must enter the city and recover my ring."
Moonglum shuddered. "It would be more foolish than any plan of mine, Elric. Urish would destroy us."
"None the less, to Nadsokor I must go."
Moonglum bent and began systematically to strip the girl's corpse of its jewellery. "We'll need every
penny we can raise if we're to buy decent horses for our journey," he explained.
CHAPTER THREE
The Cold Ghouls
Framed against the scarlet sunset, Nadso-kor looked from this distance more like a badly kept graveyard
than a city. Towers tottered, houses were half-collapsed, the walls were broken.
Elric and Moonglum came up the peak of the hill on their fast Shazarian horses (which had cost them all
they had) and saw it. Worse-they smelled it. A thou-sand stinks issued from the festering city and both
men gagged, turning their horses back down the hill to the valley.
"We'll camp here for a short while-until nightfall," Elric said. "Then we'll enter Nadsokor."
"Elric, I am not sure I could bear the stench. What-ever our disguise, our disgust would reveal us for
strangers."
Elric smiled and reached into his pouch. He took out two small tablets and handed one to Moonglum.
The Eastlander regarded the thing suspiciously.
"What's this?"
"A potion. I used it once before when I came to Nadsokor. It will kill your sense of smell completelyunfortunately
your sense of taste as well. . . ."
Moonglum laughed. "I did not plan to eat a gourmet meal while in the City of Beggars!" He swallowed
the pill and Elric did likewise.
Almost instantly Moonglum remarked that the stink of the city was subsiding. Later, as they chewed the
stale bread which was all that was left of their pro-visions, he said:
"I can taste nothing. The potion works."
Elric nodded. He was frowning, looking up the hill in the direction of the city as the night fell.
Moonglum took out his swords and began to hone them with the small stone he carried for the purpose.
As he honed, he watched Elric's face, trying to see if he could guess Elric's thoughts.
At last the albino spoke. "We'll need to leave the horses here, of course, for most beggars disdain their
use."
"They are proud in their perversity," Moonglum murmured.
"Aye. We'll need those rags we brought."
"Our swords will be noticed: . . ."
"Not if we wear the loose robes over all. It will mean we'll walk stiff-legged, but that's not so strange in a
beggar."
Reluctantly Moonglum got the bundles of rags from the saddle-panniers.
So it was that a filthy pair, one stooped and limping, one short but with a twisted arm, crept through the
debris which was ankle deep around the whole city of Nadsokor. They made for one of the many gaps in
the wall.
Nadsokor had been abandoned some centuries be-fore by a people fleeing from the ravages of a particularly
virulent pox which had struck down most of their number. Not long afterwards the first of the
beggars had occupied it. Nothing had been done to preserve the city's defences and now the muck around
the pe-rimeters was as effective a protection as any wall.
No one saw the two figures as they climbed over
the messy rubble and entered the dark, festering streets
of the City of Beggars. Huge rats raised themselves on
their hind legs and watched them as they made their
way to what had once been Nadsokor's senate building
and which was now Urish's palace. Scrawny dogs
with garbage dangling in their jaws warily slunk back
into the shadows. Once a little column of blind men,
each man with his right hand on the shoulder of the
man in front, tapped their way through the night, passing
directly across the street Elric and Moonglum were in. From some of the tumble-down buildings
came cacklings and titterings as the maimed caroused with the crippled and the degenerate and corrupted
coupled with their crones. As the disguised pair neared what had been Nadsokor's forum there came a
scream from one shattered doorway and a young girl, barely over puberty, dashed out pursued by a
monstrously fat beg-gar who propelled himself with astounding speed on his crutches, the livid stumps
of his legs, which termi-nated at the knee, making the motions of running. Moonglum tensed, but Elric
held him back as the fat cripple bore down his prey, abandoned his crutches which rattled on the broken
pavement, and flung him-self on the child.
Moonglum tried to free himself from Elric's grasp but the albino whispered: "Let it happen. Those who
are whole either in mind, body or spirit cannot be tolerated in Nadsokor."
There were tears in Moonglum's eyes as he looked at his friend. "Your cynicism is as disgusting as anything
they do!"
"I do not doubt it. But we are here for one purpose -to recover the stolen Ring of Kings. That, and nought
else, is what we shall do."
"What matters that when . . . ?"
But Elric was continuing on his way to the forum and after hesitating for a moment Moonglum followed
him.
Now they stood on the far side of the square looking
at Urish's palace. Some of its columns had fallen, but
on this building alone had there been some attempt at
restoration and decoration. The archway of the main
entrance was painted with crude representations of the
Arts of Begging and Extortion. An example of the
coinage of all the nations of the Young Kingdoms had
been imbedded in the wooden door and above it had
been nailed, perhaps ironically, a pair of wooden
crutches, crossed as swords might be crossed, indicating
that the weapons of the beggar were his power to
horrify and disgust those luckier or better endowed than himself.
Elric stared through the murk at the building and he had a calculating frown on his face.
"There are no guards," he said to Moonglum.
"Why should there be? What have they to guard?"
"There were guards last time I came to Nadsokor. Urish protects his hoard most assiduously. It is not
outsiders he fears but his own despicable rabble."
"Perhaps he no longer fears them."
Elric smiled. "A creature like King Urish fears every-thing. We had best be wary when we enter the hall.
Have your swords ready to draw at any hint that we have been lured into a trap."
"Surely Urish would not suspect we'd know where the girl came from?"
"Aye, it seemed good chance that one of them told us, but none the less we must make allowances for
Urish's cunning."
"He would not willingly bring you here-not with the Black Sword at your side."
"Perhaps. . . ."
They began to walk across the forum. It was very still, very dark. From far away came the occasional
shout, a laugh or an obscene, indefinable sound.
Now they were at the door, standing beneath the crossed crutches.
Elric felt beneath his ragged robes for the hilt of his sword and with his left hand pushed at the door. It
squeaked open a fraction. They looked about them to see if anyone had heard the sound, but the square
was as still as it had been.
More pressure. Another squeak. And now they could squeeze their bodies through the aperture.
They stood in Urish's hall. Braziers of garbage gave off faint light. Oily smoke curled towards the
rafters. They saw the dim outlines of the dais at the far end and on the dais stood Urish's huge, crude
throne. The hall seemed deserted, but Elric's hand did not leave the hilt of the Black Sword.
He stopped as he heard a sound, but it was a great, black rat scuttling across the floor.
Silence again.
Elric moved forward, step by cautious step, along the length of the slimy hall, Moonglum behind him.
Elric's spirits began to rise, as they neared the throne. Perhaps Urish had, after all, grown complacent of
his strength. He would open the trunk beneath the throne, remove his ring and then they would leave the
city and be away before dawn, riding across country to join the caravan of Rackhir the Red Archer on its
way to Tanelorn.
He began to relax but his step was just as cautious. Moonglum had paused, cocking his head to one side
as if hearing something.
Elric turned. "What is it you hear?"
"Possibly nothing. Or maybe one of those great rats
we saw earlier. It is just that-"
A silver-blue radiance burst out from behind the grotesque throne and Elric flung up his left hand to
protect his eyes, trying to disentangle his sword from his rags.
Moonglum yelled and began to run for the door, but even when Elric put his back to the light he could
not see. Stormbringer moaned in its scabbard as if in rage. Elric tugged at it, but felt his limbs grow
weaker and weaker. From behind him came a laugh which he rec-ognised. A second laugh-almost a
throaty cough-joined it.
His sight came back but now he was held by clammy hands and when he saw his captors he shuddered.
Shadowy creatures of limbo held him-ghouls sum-moned by sorcery. Their dead faces smiled but their
dead eyes remained dead. Elric felt the heat and the strength leaving his body and it was as if the ghouls
sucked it from him. He could almost feel his vitality travelling from his own body to theirs.
Again the laugh. He looked up at the throne and
saw emerging from behind it the tall, saturnine figure of
Theleb K'aarna, whom he had left for dead near the castle of Kaneloon a few months since.
Theleb K'aarna smiled in his curling beard as Elric struggled in the grasp of the ghouls. Now from the
other side of the throne came the filthy carcass of Urish the Seven-fingered, the cleaver Hackmeat cradled
in his left arm.
Elric could barely hold his head up as the ghouls' cold flesh absorbed his strength, but he smiled at his
own foolishness. He had been right in suspecting a trap, but wrong in entering it so poorly prepared.
And where was Moonglum? Had he deserted him?
The little Eastlander was nowhere to be seen.
Urish swaggered round the throne and sprawled his begrimed person in it, placing Hackmeat so that it
lay across the arms. His pale, beady eyes stared hard at Elric.
Theleb K'aarna remained standing by the side of the throne, but triumph flamed in his eyes like Imrryr's
own funeral fires.
"Welcome back to Nadsokor," wheezed Urish, scratching himself between the legs. "You have returned
to make amends, I take it."
Elric shivered as the cold in his bones increased. Stormbringer stirred at his side but it could only help
him if he drew it with his own hands. He knew he was dying.
"I have come to regain my property," he said through chattering teeth. "My ring."
"Ah! The Ring of Kings. It was yours, was it? My girl mentioned something of that."
"You sent her to steal it!"
Urish sniggered. "I'll not deny it. But I did not ex-pect the White Wolf of Imrryr to step so easily into my
trap."
"He would have stepped out again if you had not that amateur magic-maker's spells to help you!"
Theleb K'aarna glowered but then his face relaxed.
"Are you not discomforted, then, by my ghouls?"
Elric was gasping as the last of the heat fled his bones.
He now could not stand, but hung in the hands of the dead creatures. Theleb K'aarna must have planned
this for weeks, for it took many spells and pacts with the guardians of Limbo to bring such ghouls to
Earth.
"And so I die," Elric murmured. "Well, I suppose I do not care. . . ."
Urish raised his ruined features in what was a parody of pride. "You do not die yet, Elric of Melni-bone.
The sentence has yet to be passed! The formalities must be suffered! By my cleaver Hackmeat I must sentence
you for your crimes against Nadsokor and against the Sacred Hoard of King Urish!"
Elric hardly heard him as his legs collapsed alto-gether and the ghouls tightened their grip on him.
Dimly he was aware of the beggar rabble shuffling into the hall. Doubtless they had all been waiting for
this. Had Moonglum died at their hands when he fled the hall?
"Put his head up!" Theleb K'aarna instructed his dead servants. "Let him see Urish, King of All Beggars,
make his just decree!"
Elric felt a cold hand beneath his chin and his head was raised so he could watch, through misting eyes,
as Urish stood up and grasped the cleaver Hackmeat in his four-fingered hand, stretching it towards the
smoky ceiling.
"Elric of Melnibone thou art convicted of many
crimes against the Ignoblest of the Ignoble-myself,
King Urish of Nadsokor. Thou has offended King
Urish's friend, that most pleasingly degenerate villain
Theleb K'aarna-"
At this Theleb K'aarna pursed his lips, but did not interrupt.
"-and, moreover, did come a second time to the City of Beggars to repeat your crimes. By my great
cleaver Hackmeat, the symbol of my dignity and power, I condemnest thou to the Punishment of the
Burning God!"
From all sides of the hall came the foul applause of
the Beggar Court. Elric remembered a legend of
Nadsokor-that when the original population were first struck by the disease they summoned aid from
Chaos-begging Chaos to cleanse the disease from the city-with fire if necessary. Chaos had played a joke
upon these folk-sent the Burning God who had burned what was left of their possessions. A further
summons to Law to help them had resulted in the Burning God's being imprisoned by Lord Donblas in
the city. Having had enough of the Lords of the Higher Worlds the remnants of the citizens had
abandoned their city. But was the Burning God still here in Nadsokor?
Faintly he still heard Urish's voice. "Take him to the labyrinth and give him to the Burning God!"
Theleb K'aarna spoke but Elric did not hear what he said, though he heard Urish's reply.
"His sword? How will that avail him against a Lord of Chaos? Besides, if the sword is released from the
scabbard, who knows what will happen?"
Theleb K'aarna was evidently reluctant, by his tone, but at last agreed with Urish.
Now Theleb K'aarna's voice boomed commandingly.
"Things of Limbo-release him! His vitality has been your reward! Now-begone!"
Elric fell to the muck on the flagstones but was now too weak to move as beggars came forward and
lifted him up.
His eyes closed and his senses deserted him as he felt himself borne from the hall and heard the united
voices of the wizard of Pan Tang and the King of the Beggars giving vent to their mocking triumph.
CHAPTER FOUR
Punishment of the Burning God
"By Narjhan's droppings he's cold!"
Elric heard the rasping voice of one of the beggars who carried him. He was still weak but some of the
beggars' body heat had transferred itself to him and the chill of his bones was now by no means as
intense.
"Here's the portal."
Elric forced his eyes open.
He was upside down but could see ahead of him through the gloom.
Something shimmered there.
It looked like the iridescent skin of some unearthly animal stretched across the arch of the tunnel.
He was jerked backwards as the beggars swung his body and hurled it towards the shimmering skin.
He struck it.
It was viscous.
It clung to him and he felt it was absorbing him. He tried to struggle but was still far too weak. He was
sure that he was being killed.
But after long minutes he was through it and had struck stone and lay gasping in the blackness of the
tunnel.
This must be the labyrinth of which Urish had spoken.
Trembling, he tried to rise, using his scabbarded sword as a support. It took him some time to get up but
at last he could lean against the curving wall.
He was surprised. The stones seemed to be hot. Per-haps it was because he was so cold and in reality the
stones were of normal heat?
Even this speculation seemed to weary him. What-ever the nature of the heat it was welcome. He pressed
his back harder against the stones.
As their heat passed into his body he felt a sensation almost of ecstacy and he drew a deep breath.
Strength was returning slowly.
"Gods," he murmured, "even the snows of the Lormyrian steppe could not compare with such a great
cold."
He drew another deep breath and coughed.
Then he realised that the drug he had swallowed was beginning to wear off.
He wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and spat out saliva. Something of the stink of Nadsokor
had entered his nostrils.
He stumbled back towards the portal. The peculiar stuff still shimmered there. He pressed his hand
against it and it gave reluctantly but then held firm. He leant his whole weight on it but it would still not
give any further. It was like a particularly tough membrane but it was not flesh. Was this the stuff with
which the Lords of Law had sealed off the tunnel, entrapping their enemy, the Lord of Chaos? The only
light in the tunnel came from the membrane itself.
"By Arioch, I'll turn the tables on the Beggar King," Elric murmured. He threw back his rags and put his
hand on Stormbringer's pommel. The blade purred as a cat might purr. He drew the sword from its
scabbard and it began to sing a low, satisfied song. Now Elric hissed as its power flowed up his arm and
into his body. Stormbringer was giving him the strength he needed-but he knew that Stormbringer must
be paid soon, must taste blood and souls and thus replenish its energy. He aimed a great blow at the
shimmering wall. "I'll hack down this portal and release the Burning God upon Nadsokor! Strike true,
Stormbringer! Let flame come to devour the filth that is this city!"
But Stormbringer howled as it bit into the membrane
and it was held fast. No rent appeared in the stuff. Instead
Elric had to tug with all his might to get the sword free. He withdrew, panting.
"The portal was made to withstand the efforts of Chaos," Elric murmured. "My sword's useless against it.
And so, unable to go back I must, perforce, go for-ward." Stormbringer in hand he turned and began to
make his way along the passage. He took one turn and then another and then a third and the light had
disap-peared completely. He reached for his pouch where his flint and tinder were kept, but the beggars
had cut that from his belt as they carried him. He decided to retrace his steps. But by now he was deeply
within the laby-rinth and he could not find the portal.
"No portal-but no God, it seems. Mayhap there's another exit from this place. If it's blocked by a door of
wood, then Stormbringer will soon carve me a path to freedom."
And so he pressed further into the labyrinth, taking a hundred twists and turns in the darkness before he
paused again.
He had noticed that he was growing warmer. Now, instead of feeling horribly cold, he felt
uncomfortably hot. He was sweating. He removed some of the upper layers of his rags and stood in his
own shirt and breeks. He had begun to thirst.
Another turning and he saw light ahead.
"Well, Stormbringer, perhaps we are free after all!"
He began to run towards the source of the light. But it was not daylight, neither was it the light from the
portal. This was firelight-of brands, perhaps.
He could see the sides of the tunnel quite clearly in the firelight. Unlike the masonry in the rest of
Nadsokor, this was free of filth-a plain, grey stone stained by the red light.
The source of the light was around the next bend. But the heat had grown greater and his flesh stung as
the sweat sprang from his pores.
"AAH!"
A great voice suddenly filled the tunnel as Elric
rounded the bend and saw the fire leaping not thirty yards distant.
"AAH! AT LAST!"
The voice came from the fire.
And Elric knew he had found the Burning God.
"I have no quarrel with you, my lord of Chaos!" he called. "I, too, serve Chaos!"
"But I must eat," came the voice. "CHECKALAKH MUST EAT!"
"I am poor food for one such as you," Elric said reasonably, putting both his hands around Stormbringer's
hilt and taking a step backward.
"Aye, beggar, that thou art-but thou art the only food they send!"
"I'm no beggar!"
"Beggar or not, Checkalakh will devour thee!"
The flames shook and a shape began to be made of them. It was a human shape but comprised entirely of
flame. Flickering hands of fire stretched out towards Elric.
And Elric turned.
And Elric ran.
And Checkalakh, the Burning God, came fast as a flash fire behind him.
Elric felt pain in his shoulder and he smelled burn-ing cloth. He increased his speed, having no notion of
where he ran.
And still the Burning God pursued him.
"Stop, mortal! It is futile! Thou canst not escape Checkalakh of Chaos!"
Elric shouted back in desperate humour. "I'll be no one's roast pork!" His step began to falter. "Not-not
even a god's!"
Like the roar of flames up a chimney, Checkalakh replied, "Do not defy me, mortal! It is an honour to
feed a god!"
Both the heat and the effort of running were exhaust-ing Elric. A plan of sorts had formed in his brain
when he had first encountered the Burning God. That was why he had started to run.
But now, as Checkalakh came on, he was forced to turn.
"Thou art somewhat feeble for so mighty a Lord of Chaos," he panted, readying his sword.
"My long sojourn here has weakened me," Check-alakh replied, "else I would have caught thee ere now!
But catch thee I will! And devour thee I must!"
Stormbringer whined its defiance at the enfeebled Chaos God and blade struck out at flaming head and
gashed the god's right cheek so that paler fire flickered there and something ran up the black blade and
into Elric's heart so that he trembled in a mixture of terror and joy as some of the Burning God's lifeforce
entered him.
Eyes of flame stared at the Black Sword and then at Elric. Brows of flame furrowed and Checkalakh
halted.
"Thou art no ordinary beggar, 'tis true!"
"I am Elric of Melnibone and I bear the Black Sword. Lord Arioch is my master-a more powerful entity
than you, Lord Checkalakh."
Something akin to misery passed across the god's fiery countenance. "Aye-there are many more powerful
than me, Elric of Melnibone."
Elric wiped sweat from his face. He drew in great gulps of burning air. "Then why-why not combine
your strength with mine. Together we can tear down the portal and take vengeance on those who have
con-spired to bring us together."
Checkalakh shook his head and little tongues of fire fell from it. "The portal will only open when I am
dead. So it was decreed when Lord Donblas of Law impris-oned me here. Even if we were successful in
destroying the portal-it would result in my death. Therefore, most powerful of mortals, I must fight thee
and eat thee."
And again Elric began to run, desperately seeking
the portal, knowing that the only light he could hope
to find in the labyrinth came from the Burning God
himself. Even if he were to defeat the god, he would still be trapped in the complex maze.
And then he saw it. He was back at the place where he had been thrown through the membrane.
"It is only possible to enter my prison through the portal, not leave it!" called Checkalakh.
"I'm aware of that!" Elric took a firmer grip on Stormbringer and turned to face the thing of flame.
Even as his sword swung back and forth, parrying every attempt of the Burning God's to seize him, Elric
felt sympathy for the creature. He had come in answer to the summonings of mortals and he had been imprisoned
for his pains.
But Elric's clothes had begun to smoulder now and even though Stormbringer supplied him with energy
every time it struck Checkalakh the heat itself was beginning to overwhelm him. He sweated no more. Instead
his skin felt dry and about to split. Blisters were forming on his white hands. Soon he would be
able to hold the blade no longer.
"Arioch!" he breathed. "Though this creature be a fellow Lord of Chaos, aid me to defeat him!"
But Arioch lent him no extra strength. He had al-ready learned from his patron demon that greater things
were being planned on and above the Earth and that Arioch had little time for even the most favourite of
his mortal charges.
Yet, from habit, still Elric murmured Arioch's name as he swept the sword so that it struck first
Checkalakh's burning hands and then his burning shoulder and more of the god's energy entered him.
It seemed to Elric that even Stormbringer was be-ginning to burn and the pain in his blistered hands grew
so great that it was at last the only sensation of which he was aware. He staggered back against the
iridescent membrane and felt its fleshlike texture on his back. The ends of his long hair were beginning
to smoke and large areas of his clothes had completely charred.
Was Checkalakh failing, though? The flames burned
less brightly and there was an expression of resignation beginning to form on the face of fire.
Elric drew on his pain as his only source of strength and he made the pain take the sword and bring it
back over his head and he made the pain bring Stormbringer down in a massive blow aimed at the god's
head.
And even as the blow descended the fire began to die. Then Stormbringer had struck and Elric yelled as
an enormous wave of energy poured into his body and knocked him backwards so that the sword fell
from his hand and he felt that his flesh could not contain what it now held. He rolled, moaning, on the
floor and he kicked at the air, raising his twisted, blistered hands to the roof as if in supplication to some
being who had the power to stop what was happening to him. There were no tears in his eyes, for it
seemed that even his blood had begun to boil out of him.
"Arioch! Save me!" He was shuddering, screaming.
"Arioch! Stop this thing happening to me!"
He was full of the energy of a god and the mortal frame was not meant to contain so much force.
"Aaaah! Take it from me!"
He became aware of a calm, beautiful face looking down upon him as he writhed. He saw a tall manmuch
taller than himself-and he knew that this was no mortal at all, but a god.
"It is over!" said a pure, sweet voice. And, though the creature did not move, soft hands seemed to
caress him and the pain began to diminish and the voice continued to speak.
"Long centuries ago, I, Lord Donblas the Justice
Maker, came to Nadsokor to free it from the grip of
Chaos. But I came too late. Evil brought more evil,
as evil will, and I could not interfere too much with
the affairs of mortals, for we of Law have sworn to let
mankind make its own destiny if that is possible. Yet
the Cosmic Balance swings now like the pendulum of a
clock with a broken spring and terrible forces are at
work on the Earth. Thou, Elric, art a servant of Chaos
-yet thou hast served Law more than once. It has been
said that the destiny of mankind rests within thee and that may be true. Thus, I aid thee-though I do so
against mine own oath. . . ."
And Elric closed his eyes and felt at peace for the first time that he remembered.
The pain had gone, but great energy still filled him. When he opened his eyes again there was no
beautiful face looking down on him and the scintillating mem-brane which had covered the archway had
disappeared. Nearby Stormbringer lay and he sprang up and seized the sword, returning it to his 
scabbard. He noticed that the blisters had left his hands and that even his clothes were no longer charred.
Had he dreamed it all-or most of it?
He shook his head. He was free. He was strong. He had his sword with him. Now he would return to the
hall of King Urish and take his vengeance both on Nadsokor's ruler and Theleb K'aarna.
He heard a footfall and withdrew into the shadows. Light filtered into the tunnel from gaps in the roof
and it was plain that at this point it was close to the surface. A figure appeared and he recognised it at
once.
"Moonglum!"
The little Eastlander grinned in relief and sheathed his swords. "I came here to aid you if I could, but I
see you need no aid from me!"
"Not here. The Burning God is no more. I'll tell you of that later. What became of you?"
"When I realised we were in a trap I ran for the door, deciding it would be best if one of us were free and
I knew it was you they wanted. But then I saw the door opening and realised they had been waiting there
all along." Moonglum wrinkled his nose and dusted at the rags he still wore. "Thus I came to find myself
lying at the bottom of one of those heaps of garbage littered about Urish's hall. I dived into it and stayed
there, listening to what passed. As soon as I could, I found this tunnel; planning to help you however I
could."
"And where are Urish and Theleb K'aarna now?"
"It appears that they go to make good Theleb
K'aarna's bargain with Urish. Urish was not altogether
happy with the plan to lure you here for he fears your
power-"
"He has reason to! Now!"
"Aye. Well, it seems that Urish had heard what we had heard, that the caravan for Tanelorn was on its
way back to that city. Urish has knowledge of Tanelorn -though not much, I gather-and fosters an
unreason-ing hatred for the place, perhaps because it is the opposite of what Nadsokor is."
"They plan to attack Rackhir's caravan?"
"Aye-and Theleb K'aarna is to summon creatures from Hell to ensure that their attack is successful.
Rackhir has no sorcery to speak of, I believe,"
"He served Chaos once, but no more-those who dwell in Tanelorn can have no supernatural masters."
"I gathered as much from the conversation."
"When do they make this attack?"
"They have gone already-almost as soon as they had dealt with you. Urish is impatient."
"It is unlike the beggars to make a direct attack on a caravan."
"They do not always have a powerful wizard for an ally."
"True." Elric frowned. "My own powers of sorcery are limited without the Ring of Kings upon my hand.
Its supernatural qualities identify me as a true member of the Royal Line of Melnibone-the line which
made so many bargains with the elementals. First I must recover my ring and then we go at once to aid
Rackhir."
Moonglum glanced at the floor. "They said some-thing of protecting Urish's Hoard in his absence. There
may be a few armed men in the hall."
Elric smiled. "Now that we are prepared and now I have the strength of the Burning God in me, I think
we shall be able to deal with a whole army, Moonglum."
Moonglum brightened. "Then I'll lead the way back to the hall. Come. This passage will take us to a door
which is let into the side of the hall, near the throne."
They began to run along the passage until they came at length to the door Moonglum had mentioned.
Elric did not pause but drew his sword and flung the door open. It was only when he was in the hall that
he stopped. Daylight now lit the gloomy place, but it was again deserted. No sword-bearing beggars
awaited them.
Instead, there sat in Urish's throne a fat, scaly thing of yellow and green and black. Brown bile dripped
from its grinning snout and it raised one of its many paws in a mockery of a salute.
"Greetings," it hissed, "and beware-for I am the guardian of Urish's treasure."
"A thing of Hell," Elric said. "A demon raised by Theleb K'aarna. He has been brewing his spells for a
long time, methinks, if he can command so many foul servants." He frowned and weighed Stormbringer
in his hand but, oddly, the blade did not seem to hunger for battle.
"I warn thee," hissed the demon, "I cannot be slain by a sword-not even that sword. It is my wardpact. . .
."
"What is that?" whispered Moonglum, eying the demon warily.
"He is of a race of demons used by all with sorcerous power. He is a guardian. He will not attack unless
himself attacked. He is virtually invulnerable to mortal weapons and, in his case, he has a ward against
swords -be they supernatural or no. If we attempted to slay him with our swords, we should be struck
down by all the powers of Hell. We could not possibly survive."
"But you have just destroyed a god! A demon is nothing compared with that!"
"A weak god," Elric reminded him. "And this is a strong demon-for he is a representative of all demons
who would mass with him to preserve his wardpact."
"Is there no chance of defeating him?"
"If we are to help Rackhir, there is no reason for trying. We must get to our horses and try to warn the
caravan. Later, perhaps, we can return and think of some sorcery which will aid us against the demon."
Elric bowed sardonically to the demon and returned his salute. "Farewell unlovely one. May your master
not return to release you and thus ensure you squat in this filth forever!"
The demon slobbered in rage. "My master is Theleb K'aarna-one of the most powerful sorcerers amongst
your kind."
Elric shook his head. "Not my kind. I shall be slay-ing him soon and you will be left there until I
discover the means of destroying you."
Somewhat pettishly, the demon folded its multitude of arms and closed its eyes.
Elric and Moonglum strode through the muck-strewn hall towards the door.
They were close to vomiting by the time they reached the steps leading into the forum. The rest of Elric's
potions had been taken when his purse was taken and they had no protection now against the stink.
Moonglum spat on the steps as they descended into the square and then he looked up and drew his two
swords in a cross-arm motion.
"Elric!"
Some dozen beggars were rushing at them, bearing an array of clubs, axes and knives.
Elric laughed. "Here's a titbit for you, Stormbringer!" He drew his sword and began to swing the howling
blade around his head, moving implacably towards the beggars. Almost immediately two of their number
broke and ran, but the rest came in a rush at the pair.
Elric brought the sword lower and took a head from its shoulders and had bitten deep into the next man's
shoulder before the first's blood had begun to spout.
Moonglum darted in with his two slim swords and engaged two of the beggars at the same time. Elric
stabbed at another and the man screamed and danced, clutching at the blade which remorselessly drew
out his soul and his life.
Stormbringer was singing a sardonic song now and
three of the surviving beggars dropped their weapons
and were off across the square as Moonglum neatly
took both his opponents simultaneously in their hearts and Elric hacked down the rest of the rabble as
they shouted and groaned for mercy.
Elric sheathed Stormbringer, looked down at the crimson ruin he had caused, wiped his lips as a man 
might who had just enjoyed a fine meal, caused Moon-glum to shudder, and clapped his friend on the
shoul-der.
"Come-let's to Rackhir's aid!"
As Moonglum followed the albino, he reflected that Elric had absorbed more than just the Burning God's
life force in the encounter in the labyrinth. Much of the callousness of the Lords of Chaos was in him
today.
Today Elric seemed a true warrior of ancient Melnibone.
CHAPTER FIVE
Things Which Are Not Women
The beggars had been too absorbed in their triumph over the albino and their plans for their attack on the
caravan of Tanelorn to think to seek the mounts on which Elric and Moonglum had come to Nadsokor.
They found the horses where they had left them the previous night. The superb Shazarian steeds were
cropping the grass as if they had been waiting only a few minutes.
They climbed into their saddles and soon were riding as fast as the fleet horses could carry them-Northnorth-east
to the point the caravan was logically due to reach.
Shortly after noon they had found it-a long sprawl of waggons and horses, awnings of gay, rich silks,
brightly decorated harness, it stretched across the floor of a shallow valley. And surrounding it on all
sides was the squalid and motley beggar army of King Urish of Nadsokor.
Elric and Moonglum reined in their horses when they reached the brow of the hill and they watched.
Theleb K'aarna and King Urish were not immedi-ately visible and at last Elric saw them on the opposite
hill. By the way in which the sorcerer was stretching out his arms to the deep blue sky Elric guessed he
was already summoning the aid he had promised Urish.
Below Elric saw a flash of red and knew that it must
be the scarlet garb of the Red Archer. Peering closer
he saw one or two other shapes he recognised-Brut
of Lashmar with his blond hair and his huge, burly
body almost dwarfing his warhorse; Carkan, once of Pan Tang himself, but now dressed in the chequered
cloak and fur cap of the barbarians of Southern Ilmiora. Rackhir himself had been a Warrior Priest from
Moonglum's country beyond the Weeping Waste, but all these men had foresworn their gods to go to
live in peaceful Tanelorn where, it was said, even the greatest Lords of the Higher Worlds could not
enterEternal
Tanelorn, which had stood for uncountable cycles and would outlive the Earth herself.
Knowing nothing of Theleb K'aarna's plan Rackhir was plainly not too worried by the appearance of the
beggar rabble which was as poorly armed as those Elric and Moonglum had fought in Nadsokor.
"We must ride through their army to reach Rackhir now," Moonglum said.
Elric nodded but he made no move. He was watching the distant hill where Theleb K'aarna continued his
incantation, hoping that he might guess what kind of aid the sorcerer was summoning.
A moment later Elric yelled and spurred his horse down the hill at a gallop. Moonglum was almost as
startled as the beggars as he followed his friend into the thick of the ragged horde, slashing this way and
that with the longest of his swords.
Elric's Stormbringer emitted black radiance as it carved a bloody path through the beggar army, leaving
in its wake a mess of dismembered bodies, entrails and dead, horrified eyes.
Moonglum's horse was splashed with blood to the shoulder and it snorted and balked at following the
white-skinned demon with the howling black blade, but Moonglum, afraid that the beggar ranks would
close, forced it on until at last they were both riding towards the caravan and someone was yelling Elric's
name.
It was Rackhir the Red Archer, clothed in scarlet
from head to foot, with a red bone bow in his hand
and a red quiver of crimson-fletched arrows on his
back. On his head was a scarlet skull cap decorated
with a single scarlet feather. His face was weatherbeaten
and all but fleshless. He had fought with Elric before the Fall of Imrryr and together they had discovered
the Black Swords. Rackhir had gone on to seek Tanelorn and find it at last.
Elric had not seen Rackhir since then. Now he noted an enviable look of peace in the archer's eyes.
Rackhir had once been a Warrior Priest in the Eastlands, serv-ing Chaos, but now he served nothing but
his tranquil Tanelorn.
"Elric! Have you come to help us send Urish and his beggars back to where they came from?" Rackhir
was laughing, evidently pleased to see his old friend. "And Moonglum! When did you two meet? I have
not seen thee since I left the Eastlands!"
Moonglum grinned. "Much has come to pass since those days, Rackhir."
Rackhir rubbed at his aquiline nose. "Aye-so I've heard."
Elric dismounted swiftly. "No time for reminiscence now, Rackhir. You're in greater danger than you
know."
"What? When did the beggar rabble of Nadsokor offer anything to fear? Look how poorly armed they
are!"
"They have a sorcerer with them-Theleb K'aarna of Pan Tang. See-that's him on yonder hill."
Rackhir frowned. "Sorcery. These days I've little guard against that. How good is the sorcerer, do you
know?"
"He is one of the most powerful in Pan Tang."
"And the wizards of Pan Tang almost equal your folk, Elric, in their skills."
"I fear he more than equals me at present, for my Actorios Ring has been stolen from me by Urish."
Rackhir looked strangely at Elric, noting something in the albino's face which he had evidently not seen
there when they last parted. "Well," he said, "we shall have to defend ourselves as best we can. . . ."
"If you cut loose your horses so that all your folk
could be mounted we might be able to escape before
Theleb K'aarna invokes whatever supernatural aid it is he seeks." Elric nodded as the giant, Brut of
Lashmar, rode up grinning at him. Brut had been a hero in Lash-mar before he had disgraced himself.
Rackhir shook his head. "Tanelorn needs the pro-visions we carry."
"Look," said Moonglum quietly.
On the hill where Theleb K'aarna had been standing there had now appeared a billowing cloud of
redness, like blood in clear water.
"He is successful." Rackhir murmured. "Brut! Let all be mounted. We've no time to prepare further defences,
but we'll have the advantage of being on horse-back when they attack."
Brut thundered off, yelling at the men of Tanelorn. They began to unharness the wagon horses and ready
their weapons.
The cloud of redness above was beginning to disperse and out of it shapes were emerging. Elric tried to
dis-tinguish the shapes but could not at that distance. He climbed back into his saddle as the horsemen of
Tane-lorn now formed themselves into groups which would, when the attack came, race through the
unmounted beggars striking swiftly and passing on. Rackhir waved to Elric and went to join one of these
divisions. Elric and Moonglum found themselves at the head of a dozen warriors armed with axes, pikes
and lances.
Then Urish's voice cawed out over the waiting silence.
"Attack, my beggars! They are doomed!"
The beggar rabble began to move down the sides of the valley. Rackhir raised his sword as the signal to
his men. Then the first groups of cavalry rode out from the caravan, straight at the advancing beggars.
Rackhir replaced his blade and took up his bow. From where he sat on his horse he began to send arrow
after arrow into the beggar ranks.
There was shouting everywhere now as the warriors of Tanelorn met their foes, driving wedges 
everywhere in their mass.
Elric saw Carkan's chequered cape in the midst of a sea of rags, filthy limbs, clubs and knives. He saw
Brut's great blond head towering over a cluster of human filth.
And Moonglum said: "Such creatures as these are unfit opponents for the warriors of Tanelorn."
Elric pointed grimly up the hill. "Perhaps they'll prefer their new foes."
Moonglum gasped. "They are women!"
Elric drew Stormbringer from its scabbard. "They are not women. They are Elenoin. They come from the
Eighth Plane-and neither are they human. You will see."
"You recognize them?"
"My ancestors fought them once."
A strange, shrill ululation reached their ears now. It came from the hillside where Theleb K'aarna's figure
could again be seen. It came from the shapes which Moonglum was sure were women. Red-haired
women whose tresses fell almost to their knees and covered their otherwise completely naked bodies.
They danced down the hill towards the besieged caravan and they whirled swords about their heads
which must have been over five feet long.
"Theleb K'aarna is clever," Elric muttered. "The warriors of Tanelorn will hesitate before striking at
women. And while they hesitate the Elenoin will rip and slash and slay them."
Rackhir had already seen the Elenoin and he, too, recognised them for what they were. "Do not be deceived,
men!" he called. "These creatures are demons!" He glanced across at Elric and there was a look
of resignation on his face. He knew the power of the Elenoin. He spurred his horse towards the albino.
"What can we do, Elric?"
Elric sighed. "What can mortals do against the Elenoin?"
"Have you no sorcery?"
"With the Ring of Kings I could summon the
Grahluk, perhaps. They are the ancient enemies of the
Elenoin. Theleb K'aarna has already made a gateway from the Eighth Plane."
"Could you not try to call the Grahluk?" Rackhir begged.
"While I tried my sword would not be aiding you. I think Stormbringer is more use today than spells."
Rackhir shuddered and turned his horse away to order his men to re-form their ranks. He knew now that
they were all to die.
And now the beggars fell back, as horrified by the Elenoin as were the men of Tanelorn.
Still singing their shrill, chill song, the Elenoin low-ered their swords and spread out along the hill, each
one smiling at them.
"How can they . . . ?" Then Moonglum saw their eyes. They were huge, orange, animal eyes. "Oh, by the
Gods!" And then he saw their teeth-long, pointed teeth which glinted like metal.
The horsemen of Tanelorn fell back to the waggons in a long, ragged line. Horror, despair, uncertainty
was on every face save Elric's-and on his face was a look of grim anger. His crimson eyes smouldered as
he held Stormbringer across his saddle pommel and regarded the demon women, the Elenoin.
The singing grew louder until it made their ears fill with sharp pain and made their stomachs turn. The
Elenoin raised their slender arms and began to whirl their long swords about their heads again, staring at
them all the while through beastlike, insensate eyes-malicious, unblinking eyes.
Then Carkan of Pan Tang, his fur cap askew, his chequered cloak billowing, gave a strangled yell and
urged his heavy horse at them, his own sword waving.
"Back, demons! Back, spawn of hell!"
"Aaaaaaaah!" gasped the Elenoin in anticipation.
"Eeeeeeeh!" they sang.
And Carkan was suddenly in the midst of a dozen
slender, slashing swords and he and his horse were cut
all to tiny morsels of flesh which lay in a heap at the
feet of the Elenoin. And their laughter filled the valley
as some of them bent to pop the flesh into their fanged mouths.
A groan of horror and hatred went up from the ranks of Tanelorn then and screaming men, hysterical
with fear and disgust, began to fling themselves at the Elenoin who laughed the more and whirled their
sharp swords.
Stormbringer murmured as it seemed to hear the sounds of battle, but Elric did not move as he stared at
the scene. He knew that the Elenoin would kill all as they had killed Carkan.
Moonglum moaned. "Elric-there must be some sorcery against them!"
"There is! But I cannot summon the Grahluk!"
Elric's chest was heaving and his brain was in turmoil.
"I cannot, Moonglum!"
"For the sake of Tanelorn, you must try!"
Then Elric was riding forward, Stormbringer howl-ing, riding at the Elenoin and screaming Arioch's
name as his ancestors had screamed it since the founding of Imrryr!
"Arioch! Arioch! Blood and souls for my Lord Arioch!"
He parried the whirling blade of an Elenoin and glared into the bestial eyes as Stormbringer sent a shudder
down his arm. He struck and his own blow was parried by the demon that was not a woman. Red hair
swung and curled around his throat. He hacked at it and it loosened its grip. He thrust at the naked body
and the Elenoin danced aside. Another whistling blow from the slim sword and he flung himself
backwards to avoid it, toppling from his saddle and springing in-stantly to his feet to parry a second
attack, gripped Stormbringer in both hands and stepped forward under the blade to plunge the Black
Sword into the smooth belly. The Elenoin shouted with anger and green foul-ness billowed from the
wound. The Elenoin fell, still glaring and snarling, still living. Elric chopped at the neck and the head
sprang off, its hair thrashing at him.
He dashed forward, picked up the head and began to
run up the hill to where the beggars were gathered, watching the destruction of Tanelorn's warriors. As
he approached the beggars broke and began to run, but he caught one in the back with his blade. The
man fell, tried to crawl on, but his twisted knees would not sup-port him and he collapsed into the
stained grass. Elric picked the wretch up and flung him over his shoulder. Then he turned and began to
run down the hill back to the camp. The warriors of Tanelorn were fighting well, but half their number
had already been slain by the Elenoin. Almost unbelievably there were also sev-eral Elenoin corpses on
the field.
Elric saw Moonglum defending himself with both swords. He saw Rackhir, still mounted, shouting
orders to his men. He saw Brut of Lashmar in the thick of the fight. But he ran on until he stood behind
one of the waggons and had dropped both his bloody bundles to the ground. With his sword he split open
the twitching body of the beggar and he gathered up the hair of the Elenoin and soaked it in the man's
blood.
Again he stood upright, looking towards the west, with the bloody hair in one hand and Stormbringer in
the other. He raised both sword and head and began to speak in the ancient High Speech of Melnibone.
Held to the West and soaked in the blood of an enemy, the hair of an Elenoin must be used to summon
the enemies of the Elenoin-the Grahluk. He remem-bered the words he had read in his father's ancient
grimoire.
And now the invocation:
Grahluk come and Grahluk slay!
Come kill thine ancient enemy!
Make this thy victory day.
All the strength of the Burning God was leaving him as he used the energy to perform the invocation.
And perhaps without the Ring of Kings he was wasting that strength for nothing.
Grahluk speed without delay!
Come kill thine ancient enemy!
Make this thy vengeance day.
The spell was far less complex than many he had used in the past. Yet it took as much from him as any
spell ever had.
"Grahluk, I summon thee! Grahluk, here you may take vengeance on your foes!"
Many cycles since, the Elenoin were said to have driven the Grahluk from their lands in the Eighth Plane
and the Grahluk sought revenge now at every opportunity.
All around Elric the air shivered and turned brown, then green, then black.
"Grahluk! Come destroy the Elenoin!" Elric's voice was weakening. "Grahluk-the gateway is made!"
And now the ground trembled and strange winds blew at the blood-soaked hair of the Elenoin and the air
became thick and purple and Elric fell to his knees, still croaking the invocation.
"Grahluk ..."
A shuffling sound. A grunting noise. The stink of something unnameable.
The Grahluk had come. They were apelike creatures as bestial as the Elenoin. They carried nets and
ropes and shields. Once, it was said, both Grahluk and Elenoin had had intelligence-had been part of the
same species which had devolved and divided.
They moved out of the purple mist in their scores and they stood looking at Elric who was still on his
knees. Elric pointed at where the remaining warriors of Tanelorn were still fighting the Elenoin.
"There ..."
The Grahluk snorted with battle-greed and shambled towards the Elenoin.
The Elenoin saw them and their shrill wailing voices changed in quality as they retreated a short distance
up the hill.
Elric forced himself to his feet and gasped: "RackMr!
Withdraw your warriors. The Grahluk will do their work now. . . ."
"You helped us after all!" Rackhir yelled, turning his horse. His clothes were all in tatters and there were
a dozen wounds on his body.
They watched as the Grahluk's nets and nooses flashed towards the screaming Elenoin whose sword
blows were stopped by the Grahluk shields. They watched as the Elenoin were crushed and throttled and
parts of their entrails devoured by the grunting, apelike demons.
And when the last of the Elenoin was dead, the Grahluk picked up the fallen swords and reversed them
and fell upon them.
Rackhir said: "They are killing themselves. Why?"
"They live only to destroy the Elenoin. Once that is done, they have nothing left for which to exist." Elric
swayed and Rackhir and Moonglum caught him.
"See!" Moonglum laughed. "The beggars are run-ning!"
"Theleb K'aarna," Elric muttered. "We must get Theleb K'aarna. . . ."
"Doubtless he has gone back with Urish to Nadso-kor," Moonglum said.
"I must-I must retrieve the Ring of Kings."
"Plainly you can work your sorcery without it," Rackhir said.
"Can I?" Elric looked up and showed his face to Rackhir who lowered his eyes and nodded.
"We will help you get back your ring," Rackhir said quietly. "There'll be no more trouble from the
beggars. We'll ride with you to Nadsokor."
"I had hoped you would." Elric climbed with diffi-culty into the saddle of a surviving horse and jerked at
its reins, turning it towards the City of Beggars. "Per-haps your arrows will slay what my sword can-not.
. . ."
"I do not understand you," Rackhir said.
Moonglum was mounting now. "We'll tell you on the way."
CHAPTER SIX
The Jesting Demon
Through the filth of Nadsokor now rode the warriors of Tanelorn.
Elric, Moonglum and Rackhir were at the head of the company but there was no ostentatious triumph in
their demeanour. The riders looked neither to left nor to right and the beggars offered no threat now, not
daring to attack but instead cowering into the shadows.
A potion of Rackhir's had helped Elric recover some of his strength and he no longer leaned over his
horse's neck but sat upright as they crossed the forum, came to the palace of the Beggar King.
Elric did not pause. He rode his horse up the steps and into the gloomy hall.
"Theleb K'aarna!" Elric shouted.
His voice boomed through the hall, but Theleb K'aarna did not reply.
The braziers of garbage guttered in the wind from the opened door and threw a little more light on the
dais at the end.
"Theleb K'aarna!"
But it was not Theleb K'aarna who knelt there. It was a wretched, ragged figure and it sprawled before
the throne and it was sobbing, imploring, whining at something on the throne.
Elric walked his horse a little further into the hall and now he could see what occupied the throne.
Squatting in the great chair of black oak was the
demon which had been there earlier. Its arms were
folded and its eyes were shut and it seemed, somewhat
theatrically, to be ignoring the pleadings of the creature kneeling at its feet.
The others, also mounted, entered the hall now and together they rode up to the dais and stopped.
The kneeling figure turned its head and it was Urish. It gasped when it saw Elric and stretched out a
maimed hand for its cleaver, abandoned some dis-tance away.
Elric sighed.
"Do not fear me, Urish. I'm weary of blood-letting.
I do not want your life."
The demon opened its eyes.
"Prince Elric, you have returned," it said. There seemed to be an indefinable difference in its tone.
"Aye. Where is your master?"
"I fear he has fled Nadsokor forever."
"And left you to sit here for eternity."
The demon inclined its head.
Urish put a grimy hand on Elric's leg. "Elric-help me! I must have my Hoard. It is everything! Destroy
the demon and I will give you back the Ring of Kings."
Elric smiled. "You are generous, King Urish."
Tears streamed down the filth on Urish's ruined face.
"Please, Elric, I beg thee. . . ."
"It is my intention to destroy the demon."
Urish looked nervously about him. "And aught else?"
"That decision lies with the men of Tanelorn whom you sought to rob and whose friends you caused to
be slain in a most foul manner."
"It was Theleb K'aarna, not I!"
"And where is Theleb K'aarna now?"
"When you unleashed those ape things on our Ele-noin he fled the field. He went towards the Varkalk
River-towards Troos."
Without looking behind him Elric said, "Rackhir?
Will you try the arrows now?"
There was the hum of a bowstring and an arrow
struck the demon in the breast. It quivered there and
the demon looked at it with mild interest, then breathed
in deeply. As he breathed the arrow was drawn further into him and was eventually absorbed altogether.
"Aaah!" Urish scuttled for his cleaver. "It will not work!"
A second arrow sped from Rackhir's scarlet bow and it, too, was absorbed, as was the third.
Urish was gibbering now, waving his cleaver.
Elric warned him: "He has a wardpact against swords, King Urish!"
The demon rattled its scales. "Is that thing a sword, I wonder?"
Urish hesitated. Spittle ran down his chin and his red
eyes rolled. "Demon-begone! I must have my Hoard
-it is mine!"
The demon watched him sardonically.
With a yell of terror and anguish Urish flung himself at the demon, the cleaver Hackmeat swinging
wildly. Its blade came down on the hell-thing's head, there was a sound like lightning striking metal and
the cleaver shivered to pieces. Urish stood staring at the demon in quaking anticipation. Casually the
demon reached out four of its hands and seized him. Its jaws opened wider than should have been
possible, the bulk of the demon expanded until it was suddenly twice its original size. It brought the
kicking Beggar King to its maw and suddenly there were only two legs waving from the mouth and then
the demon gave a mighty swallow and there was nothing at all left of Urish of Nadsokor.
Elric shrugged. "Your wardpact is effective."
The demon smiled. "Aye, sweet Elric."
Now the tone of voice was very familiar. Elric looked narrowly at the demon. "You're no ordi-nary ..."
"I hope not, most beloved of mortals."
Elric's horse reared and snorted as the demon's
shape began to alter. There was a humming sound and
black smoke coiled over the throne and then another
figure was sitting there, its legs crossed. It had the
shape of a man but it was more beautiful than any
mortal. It was a being of intense and majestic beauty-unearthly beauty.
"Arioch!" Elric bowed his head before the Lord of Chaos.
"Aye, Elric. I took the demon's place while you were gone."
"But you have refused to aid me. . . ."
"There are larger affairs afoot, as I've told you. Soon Chaos must engage with Law and such as Don-bias
will be dismissed to Limbo for eternity."
"You knew Donblas spoke to me in the labyrinth of the Burning God?"
"Indeed I did. That was why I afforded myself the time to visit your plane. I cannot have you patronised
by Donblas the Justice Maker and his humourless kind. I was offended. Now I have shown you that my
power is greater than Law's." Arioch stared beyond Elric at Rackhir, Brut, Moonglum and the rest who
were pro-tecting their eyes from his beauty. "Perhaps you fools of Tanelorn now realise that it is better to
serve Chaos!"
Rackhir said grimly: "I serve neither Chaos nor Law!"
"One day you will be taught that neutrality is more dangerous than side-taking, renegade!" The harmonious
voice was now almost vicious.
"You cannot harm me," Rackhir said. "And if Elric returns with us to Tanelorn, then he, too, may rid himself
of your evil yoke!"
"Elric is of Melnibone". The folk of Melnibone all serve Chaos-and are greatly rewarded: How else
would you have rid this throne of Theleb K'aarna's demon?"
"Perhaps in Tanelorn Elric would have no need of his Ring of Kings," Rackhir replied levelly.
There was a sound like rushing water, the boom of thunder and Arioch's form began to grow larger. But
as it grew it also began to fade until there was nothing left in the hall but the stench of its garbage.
Elric dismounted and ran to the throne. Reaching
under it he drew out dead Urish's chest and hacked it open with Stormbringer. The sword murmured as if
resenting the menial work. Gems, gold, artifacts scat-tered through the muck as Elric sought his ring.
And then at last he held it up in triumph, replacing it on his finger. His step was lighter as he returned to
his horse.
Moonglum had in the meantime dismounted and was scooping the best of the jewels into his pouch. He
winked at Rackhir, who smiled.
"And now," Elric said, "I go to Troos to seek Theleb K'aarna there. I have still to take my vengeance
upon him."
"Let him rot in Troos's sickly forest," Moonglum said.
Rackhir placed a hand on Elric's shoulder. "If Theleb K'aarna hates you so, he will find you again. Why
waste your own time in the pursuit?"
Elric smiled slightly at his old friend. "You were ever clever in your arguments, Rackhir. And it is true
that I am weary-both gods and demons have fallen to my blade in the little while since I came to Nadsokor."
"Come, rest in Tanelorn-peaceful Tanelorn, where even the greatest Lords of the Higher Worlds cannot
come without permission."
Elric looked down at the ring on his finger. "Yet I have sworn Theleb K'aarna shall perish. ..."
"There will be time yet to fulfil your oath."
Elric ran his hand through his milk-white hair and it seemed to his friends that there were tears in his
crimson eyes.
"Aye," he said. "Aye. Tune yet. . . ."
And they rode away from Nadsokor, leaving the beg-gars to brood in the stink and the foulness and
regret that they had aught to do with sorcery or with Elric of Melnibone.
They rode for Eternal Tanelorn. Tanelorn, which
had welcomed and held all troubled wanderers who came upon it. All save one.
Doom-haunted, full of guilt, of sorrow, of despair, Elric of Melnibone prayed that this time Tanelorn
might hold even him. ...
BOOK THREE
Three Heroes with a Single Aim
"... Elric, of all the manifestations
of the Champion Eternal, was to find
Tanelorn without effort. And of all
those manifestations he was the only
one to choose to leave that city of
myriad incarnations ..."
-The Chronicle of the Black Sword
CHAPTER ONE
Tanelorn Eternal
Tanelorn had taken many forms in her endless existence, but all those forms, save one, had been
beautiful.
She was beautiful now, with the soft sunlight on her pastel towers and her curved turrets and domes.
And banners flew from her spires, but they were not battle banners, for the warriors who had found Tanelorn
and had stayed there were weary of war.
She had been here always. None knew when Tane-lorn had been built, but some knew that she had 
existed before Tune and would exist after the end of Time and that was why she was known as Eternal
Tanelorn.
She had played a significant role in the struggles of
many heroes and many gods and because she existed
beyond Tune she was hated by the Lords of Chaos who
had more than once sought to destroy her. To the north
of her lay the rolling plains of Ilmiora, a land where
justice was known to prevail, and to the south of her
lay desolation which was the Sighing Desert, endless
wasteland over which hissed a constant wind. If Ilmiora
represented Law, then the Sighing Desert certainly
mirrored something of the barrenness of Ultimate
Chaos. Those who dwelled in her had loyalty neither to
Law nor to Chaos and they had chosen to have no part
in the Cosmic Struggle which was waged continuously
by the Lords of the Higher Worlds. There were no
leaders and there were no followers in Tanelorn and
her citizens lived in harmony with each other, even
though many had been warriors of great reputation before they chose to stay there. But one of the most
admired citizens of Tanelorn, one who was often con-sulted by the others, was Rackhir of the ascetic features
who had once been a fierce warrior-priest in P'hum where he had gained the name of the Red
Archer because his skill with a bow was great and he dressed all in scarlet. His skill and his dress
remained the same, but his urge to fight had left him since he had come to live in Tanelorn.
Close to the low west wall of the city lay a house of two storeys surrounded by a lawn in which grew all
manner of wild flowers. The house was of pink and yellow marble and, unlike most of the other
dwellings in Tanelorn, it had a tall, pointed roof. This was Rackhir's house and Rackhir sat outside it
now, sprawled on a bench of plain wood while he watched his guest pace the lawn. The guest was his old
friend the tormented albino Prince of Melnibone.
Elric wore a simple white shirt and britches of heavy black silk. He had a band of the same black silk
tied around his head to keep back the mane of milk-white hair which grew to his shoulders. His crimson
eyes were downcast as he paced and he did not look at Rackhir at all.
Rackhir was unwilling to intrude upon his friend's reverie and yet he hated to see Elric as he was now.
He had hoped that Tanelorn would comfort the albino, drive away the ghosts and the doubts inhabiting
his skull, but it seemed that even Tanelorn could not bring Elric tranquillity.
At last Rackhir broke his silence. "It has been a month since you came to Tanelorn, my friend, yet still
you pace, still you brood."
Elric looked up with a slight smile. "Aye-still I brood. Forgive me, Rackhir. I am a poor guest."
"What occupies your thoughts?"
"No particular subject. It seems that I cannot lose
myself in all this peace. Only violent action helps me
drive away my melancholy. I was not meant for Tane-lorn, Rackhir."
"But violent action-or the results of it-produces further melancholy does it not?"
"It is true. It is the dilemma with which I live con-stantly. It is a dilemma I have been in since the
burning of Imrryr-perhaps before."
"It is a dilemma known to all men, perhaps," Rackhir said. "At least to some degree."
"Aye-to wonder what purpose there is to one's existence and what point there is to purpose, even if it
should be discovered."
"Tanelorn makes such problems seem meaningless to me," Rackhir told him. "I had hoped that you, too,
would be able to dismiss them from your thoughts. Will you stay on in Tanelorn?"
"I have no other plans. I still thirst for vengeance upon Theleb K'aarna, but I now have no idea of his
whereabouts. And, as you or Moonglum told me, Theleb K'aarna is sure to seek me out sooner or later. I
remember once, when you first found Tanelorn, you suggested that I bring Cymoril here and forget
Melnibone. I wish I had listened to you then, Rackhir, for now, I think, I would know peace and
Cymoril's dead face would not be infesting my nights."
"You mentioned this sorceress who, you said, re-sembled Cymoril . . . ?"
"Myshella? She who is called Empress of the Dawn? I first saw her in a dream and when I left her side it
was I who was in a dream. We served each other to achieve a common purpose. I shall not see her
again."
"But if she-"
"I shall not see her again, Rackhir."
"As you say."
Once more the two friends fell silent and there was only birdsong and the splash of fountains in the air as
Elric continued his pacing of the garden.
Some while later Elric suddenly turned on his heel
and went into the house followed by Rackhir's trou-bled gaze.
When Elric came out again he was wearing the great wide belt around his waist-the belt which supported
the black scabbard containing his runesword Stormbringer. Over his shoulders was flung a cloak
of white silk and he wore high boots.
"I go riding," he said. "I will go by myself into the Sighing Desert and I will ride until I am exhausted.
Perhaps exercise is all I need."
"Be careful of the desert, my friend," Rackhir cau-tioned him. "It is a sinister and treacherous wilderness."
"I will be careful."
"Take the big golden mare. She is used to the desert and her stamina is legendary."
"Thank you. I will see you in the morning if I do not return earlier."
"Take care, Elric. I trust your remedy is successful and your melancholy disappears."
Rackhir's expression had little of relief in it as he watched his friend stride towards the near-by stables,
his white cloak billowing behind him like a sea fog suddenly risen.
Then he heard the sound of Elric's horse as its hooves struck the cobbles of the street and Rackhir got to
his feet to watch as the albino urged the golden mare into a canter and headed for the northern wall
beyond which the great yellow waste of the Sighing Desert could be seen.
Moonglum came out of the house, a large apple in his hand, a scroll under his arm.
"Where goes Elric, Rackhir?"
"He looks for peace in the desert."
Moonglum frowned and bit thoughtfully into his apple. "He has sought peace in all other places and I
fear he'll not find it there, either."
Rackhir nodded his agreement. "But it is my premonition
he'll discover something else, for Elric is
not always motivated by his own wishes. There are
times when other forces work within him to make him take some fateful action."
"You think this is such a time?"
"It could be."
CHAPTER TWO
Return of a Sorceress
The sand rippled as the wind blew it so that the dunes seemed like waves in an almost petri-fied sea.
Stark fangs of rock jutted here and there-the remains of mountain ranges which had been eroded by the
wind. And a mournful sighing could just be heard, as if the sand remembered when it had been rock and
the stones of cities and the bones of men and beasts and longed for its resurrection, sighed at the memory 
of its death.
Elric drew the cloak's cowl over Ms head to protect it from the fierce sun which hung in the steel-blue
sky.
One day, he thought, I too shall know this peace of death and perhaps then I shall also regret it. He let
the golden mare slow to a trot and took a sip of water from one of his canteens.
Now the desert surrounded him and it seemed in-finite. Nothing grew. No animals lived there. There
were no birds in the sky.
For some reason he shuddered and he had a pre-sentiment of a moment in the future when he would be
alone, as he was now, in a world even more barren than this desert, without even a horse for company.
He shook off the thought, but it had left him so stunned that for a little while he achieved his ambi-tion
and did not brood upon his fate and his situation. The wind dropped slightly and the sighing became
little more than a whisper.
Dazed, Elric fingered the pommel of his bladeStormbringer,
the Black Sword-for he associated his
presentiment with the weapon but could not tell why. And it seemed to him that he heard an ironic note
in the murmuring of the wind. Or did the sound ema-nate from his sword itself? He cocked his head, listening,
but the sound became even less audible, as if aware that he listened.
The golden mare began to climb the gentle slope of a dune, stumbling once as her foot sank into deeper
sand. Elric concentrated on guiding her to firmer ground.
Reaching the top of the dune he reined his horse in. The desert dunes rolled on, broken only by the
occasional rock. He had it in mind then to ride on and on until it would be impossible to return to
Tanelorn, until both he and his mount collapsed from exhaustion and were eventually swallowed by the
sands. He pushed back his cowl and wiped sweat from his brow.
Why not? he thought. Life was not bearable. He would try death.
And yet would death deny him? Was he doomed to live? It sometimes seemed so.
Then he considered the horse. It would not be fair to sacrifice it to his desire. Slowly he dismounted.
The wind grew stronger and the sound of its sigh-ing increased. Sand blew around Elric's booted feet. It
was a hot wind and it tugged at his voluminous white cloak. The horse snorted nervously.
Elric looked towards the north east, towards the edge of the world.
And he began to walk.
The horse whinnied enquiringly at him when he did not call it, but he ignored the sound and had soon
left his mount behind him. He had not even bothered to bring water with him. He flung back his cowl so
that the sun beat directly upon his head. His pace was even, purposeful and he marched as if at the head
of an army.
Perhaps he did sense an army behind him-the
army of the dead, of all those friends and enemies whom he had slain in the course of his pointless
search for a meaning to his existence.
And still one enemy remained alive. An enemy even stronger, even more malevolent than Theleb
K'aarna-the enemy of his darker self, of that side of his nature which was symbolised by the sentient
blade still resting at his hip. And when he died, then that enemy would also die. A force for evil would
be re-moved from the world.
For several hours Elric of Melnibone" tramped on through the Sighing Desert and gradually, as he had
hoped, his sense of identity began to leave him so that it was almost as if he became one with the wind
and the sand and, in so doing, was united at last with the world which had rejected him and which he had
re-jected.
Evening came, but he hardly noticed the sun's set-ting. Night fell, but he continued to march, unaware of
the cold. Already he was weakening. He rejoiced in the weakness where previously he had fought to
retain the strength he enjoyed only through the power of the Black Sword.
And sometime around midnight, beneath a pale moon, his legs buckled and he fell sprawling in the sand 
and lay there while the remains of his sensibili-ties left him.
"Prince Elric. My Lord?"
The voice was rich, vibrant, almost amused. It was a woman's voice and Elric recognised it. He did not
move.
"Elric of Melnibone."
He felt a hand on his arm. She was trying to pull
him upright. Rather than be dragged he raised himself
with some difficulty to a sitting position. He tried
to speak, but at first no words would come from his
mouth which was dry and full of sand. She stood
there as the dawn rose behind her and brightened her
long black hair framing her beautiful features. She
was dressed in a flowing gown of blue, green and gold and she was smiling.
As he cleared the sand from his mouth he shook Ms head, saying at last: "If I am dead, then I am still
plagued by phantoms and illusions."
"I am no more illusion than anything else in this world. You are not dead, my lord."
"You are, in that case, many leagues from Castle Kaneloon, my lady. You have come from the other side
of the world-from edge to edge."
"I have been seeking you, Elric."
"Then you have broken your word, Myshella, for when we parted you said that you would not see me
again, that our fates had ceased to be twined."
"I thought then that Theleb K'aarna was dead-that our mutual enemy had perished in the Noose of
Flesh." The sorceress spread her arms wide and it was almost as if the gesture summoned the sun, for it
appeared over the horizon, suddenly. "Why did you walk thus in the desert, my lord?"
"I sought death."
"Yet you know it is not your destiny to die in such a way."
"I have been told as much but I do not know it, Lady Myshella. However," he stumbled upright and
stood swaying before her, "I am beginning to suspect that it is so."
She came forward, bringing a goblet from beneath her robes. It was full to the brim with a cool, silvery
liquid. "Drink," she said.
He did not lift his hands towards the cup. "I am not pleased to see you, Lady Myshella."
"Why? Because you are afraid to love me?"
"If it flatters you to think that-aye."
"It does not flatter me. I know you are reminded of Cymoril and that I made the mistake of letting
Kaneloon become that which you most desire-be-fore I understood that it is also what you most fear."
He lowered his head. "Be silent!"
"I am sorry. I apologised then. We drove away the
desire and terror together for a little while, did we not?"
He looked up and she was staring intently into his eyes. "Did we not?"
"We did." He took a deep breath and stretched out his hands for the goblet. "Is this some potion to sap
my will and make me work for your interests?"
"No potion could do that. It will revive you, that is all."
He sipped the liquid and immediately his mouth was clean and his head clear. He drained the goblet and
he felt a glow of strength in all his limbs and vitals.
"Do you still wish to die?" she asked as she re-ceived back the cup, replacing it beneath her robes.
"If death will bring me peace."
"It will not-not if you die now. That I know."
"How did you find me here?"
"Oh, by a variety of means, some of them sorcer-ous. But my bird brought me to you." She extended her 
right arm to point behind him.
He turned and there was the bird of gold and silver and brass which he himself had once ridden while in
Myshella's service. Its great metallic wings were folded but there was intelligence in its emerald eyes as
it waited for its mistress.
"Have you come, then, to return me to Tanelorn?"
She shook her head. "Not yet. I have come to tell you where you may discover our enemy Theleb
K'aarna."
He smiled. "He threatens you again?"
"Not directly."
Elric shook sand from his cloak. "I know you well, Myshella. You would not interfere in my destiny unless
it had again become in some way linked with your own. You have said that I am afraid to love you.
That may be true, for I think I am afraid to love any woman. But you make use of love-the men to whom
you give your love are men who will serve your purpose."
"I do not deny that. I love only heroes-and only heroes who work to ensure the presence of the Power of
Law upon this plane of our Earth. ..."
"I care not whether Law or Chaos gains predominance.
Even my hatred of Theleb K'aarna has waned
-and that was a personal hatred, nothing to do with any cause."
"What ft you knew Theleb K'aarna once again threatens the folk of Tanelorn?"
"Impossible. Tanelorn is eternal."
"Tanelorn is eternal-but its citizens are not. I know. More than once has some catastrophe fallen upon
those who dwell in Tanelorn. And the Lords of Chaos hate Tanelorn, though they cannot attack it
directly. They would aid any mortal who thought he could destroy those whom the Chaos Lords regard
as traitors."
Elric frowned. He knew of the enmity of the Lords of Chaos to Tanelorn. He had heard that on more than
one occasion they had made use of mortals to attack the city.
"And you say Theleb K'aarna plans to destroy Tanelorn's citizens? With Chaos' aid?"
"Aye. Your thwarting of his schemes concerning Nadsokor and Rackhir's caravan made him extend his
hatred to all dwelling in Tanelorn. In Troos he discovered some ancient grimoires-things which survived
from the Age of the Doomed Folk."
"How can that be? They existed a whole time cycle before Melnibone!"
"True-but Troos itself has lasted since the Age of the Doomed Folk and these were people who had
many great inventions, a means of preserving their wisdom. . . ."
"Very well. I will accept that Theleb K'aarna found their grimoires. What did those grimoires tell him?"
"They showed him the means of causing a rupture
in the division which separates one plane of Earth
from another. This knowledge of the other planes is
largely mysterious to us-even your ancestors only guessed at the variety of existences obtaining in what
the ancients termed the 'multiverse'-and I know only a little more than do you. The Lords of the Higher
Worlds can, at times, move freely between these temporal and spatial layers, but mortals can-not-at least
not in this period of our being."
"And what has Theleb K'aarna done? Surely great power would be needed to cause this 'rupture' you
describe? He does not have that power."
"True. But he has powerful allies in the Chaos Lords. The Lords of Entropy have leagued them-selves
with him as they would league themselves with anyone who was willing to be the means of destruc-tion
of those who dwell in Tanelorn. He found more than manuscripts in the Forest of Troos. He dis-covered
those buried devices which were the inven-tions of the Doomed Folk and which ultimately brought about
their destruction. These devices, of course, were meaningless to him until the Lords of Chaos showed 
him how they could be activated using the very forces of creation for their energy."
"And he has activated them? Where?"
"He brought the device he wanted to these parts, for he needed space to work where he thought he could
not be observed by such as myself."
"He is in the Sighing Desert?"
"Aye. If you had continued on your horse you would have found him by now-or he you. I believe that is
what drove you into the desert-a compulsion to seek him out."
"I had no compulsion save a need to die!" Elric tried to control his anger.
She smiled again. "Have it thus if you will. . . ."
"You mean I am so manipulated by Fate that I cannot choose to die if I wish?"
"Ask yourself for that answer."
Elric's face was clouded with puzzlement and de-spair. "What is it, then, which guides me? And to what
end?"
"You must discover that for yourself."
"You want me to go against Chaos? Yet Chaos aids me and I am sworn to Arioch."
"But you are mortal-and Arioch is slow to aid you these days, perhaps because he guesses what lies in
the future."
"What do you know of the future?"
"Little-and what I know I cannot speak of to you.
A mortal may choose whom he serves, Elric."
"I have chosen. I chose Chaos."
"Yet much of your melancholy is because you are divided in your loyalties."
"That, too, is true."
"Besides you would not fight for Law if you fought against Theleb K'aarna-you would merely be
fighting against one aided by Chaos-and those of Chaos often fight among themselves do they not?"
"They do. It is also well known that I hate Theleb K'aarna and would destroy him whether he served Law
or Chaos."
"Therefore you will not unduly anger those to whom you are loyal-though they may be reluctant to help
you."
"Tell me more of Theleb K'aarna's plans."
"You must see for yourself. There is your horse." She pointed again and this time he saw the golden
mare emerge from the other side of a dune. "Head North-east as you were heading, but move cautiously
lest Theleb K'aarna becomes aware of your presence and traps you."
"Suppose I merely return to Tanelorn-or choose to try to die again?"
"But you will not, will you, Elric? You have loyalties to your friends, you wish in your heart to serve
what I represent-and you hate Theleb K'aarna. I do not think you would wish to die for the moment."
He scowled. "Once more I am burdened with unwanted
responsibilities, hedged by considerations other
than my own desires, trapped by emotions which we of
Melnibone have been taught to despise. Aye-I will go, Myshella. I will do what you wish."
"Be careful, Elric. Theleb K'aarna now has powers which are unfamiliar to you, which you will find difficult
to combat." She gave him a lingering look and sud-denly he had stepped forward and had seized her,
kissed her while tears flowed down his white face and mingled with hers.
Later he watched as she climbed into the onyx sad-dle of the bird of silver and gold and called out a command.
The metal wings beat with a great clashing, the emerald eyes turned and the gem-studded beak
opened. "Farewell, Elric," said the bird.
But Myshella said nothing, did not look back.
Soon the metal bird was a speck of light in the blue
sky and Elric had turned his horse towards the North-
east
CHAPTER THREE
The Barrier Broken
Elric reined in behind the cover of a crag. He had found the camp of Theleb K'aarna. A large tent of
yellow silk had been erected beneath the pro-tection of an overhang of rock which was part of a
formation making a natural amphitheatre among the dunes of the desert. A wagon and two horses were
close to the tent, but all this was dominated by the thing of metal which reared in the centre of the clearing.
It was contained in an enormous bowl of clear crystal. The bowl was almost globular with a narrow
opening at the top. The device itself was asymmetrical and strange, composed of many curved and
angular surfaces which seemed to contain myriad half-formed faces, shapes of beasts and buildings,
illusive designs coming and going even as Elric looked upon it. An imagination even more grotesque
than that of Elric's ancestors had fashioned the thing, amalgamating metals and other substances which
logic denied could ever be fused into one thing. A creation of Chaos which offered a clue as to how the
Doomed Folk had come to destroy themselves. And it was alive. Deep within it something pulsed, as
delicate and tentative as the heartbeat of a dying wren. Elric had witnessed many obscenities in his life
and was moved by few of them, but this device, though superficially more in-nocuous than much he had
seen, brought bile into his mouth. Yet for all his disgust he remained where he was, fascinated by the
machine in the bowl, until the flap of the yellow tent was drawn back and Theleb K'aarna emerged.
The Sorcerer of Pan Tang was paler and thinner than when Elric had last seen him, shortly before the
battle between the beggars of Nadsokor and the war-riors of Tanelorn. Yet unhealthy energy flushed the
cheeks and burned in the dark eyes, gave a nervous swiftness to the movements. Theleb K'aarna approached
the bowl.
As he came closer Elric could hear him muttering to himself.
"Now, now, now," murmured the sorcerer. "Soon, soon will die Elric and all who league with him. Ah,
the albino will rue the day when he earned my vengeance and turned me from a scholar into what I am
today. And when he is dead, then Queen Yishana will realise her mistake and give herself to me. How
could she love that pale-faced anachronism more than a man of my great talents? How?"
Elric had almost forgotten Theleb K'aarna's obses-sion with Queen Yishana of Jharkor, the woman who
had wielded a greater power over the sorcerer than could any magic. It had been Theleb K'aarna's jealousy
of Elric which had turned him from a relatively peaceful student of the dark arts into a vengeful
practi-tioner of the most frightful sorceries.
He watched as Theleb K'aarna began with his finger to trace complicated patterns upon the glass of the
bowl. And with every completed rune the pulse within the machine grew stronger. Oddly coloured light
began to flow through certain sections, bringing them to life. A steady thump issued from the neck of
the bowl. A peculiar stink began to reach Elric's nostrils. The core of light became brighter and larger
and the machine seemed to alter its shape, sometimes becoming ap-parently liquid and streaming around
the inside of the bowl.
The golden mare snorted and began to shift uneasily.
Elric automatically patted her neck and steadied her.
Theleb K'aarna was now merely a silhouette against the
swiftly changing light within the bowl. He continued
to murmur to himself but his words were drowned by
the heartbeats which now echoed among the surround-ing rocks. His right hand drew still more invisible
diagrams upon the glass.
The sky seemed to be darkening, though it was some hours to sunset. Elric looked up. Above his head
the sky was still blue, the golden sun still strong, but the air around him had grown dark, as if a solitary
cloud had come to cover the scene he witnessed.
Now Theleb K'aarna was stumbling back, his face stained by the strange light from the bowl, his eyes
huge and mad.
"Come!" he screamed. "Come! The barrier is down!"
Elric saw a shadow then, behind the bowl. It was a shadow which dwarfed even the great machine. Something
bellowed. It was scaly. It lumbered. It raised a huge and sinuous head. It reminded Elric of a
dragon from one of his own caves, but it was bulkier and upon its enormous back were two rows of
flapping ridges of bone. It opened its mouth to reveal row upon row of teeth and the ground shook as it
walked from the other side of the bowl and stood staring down at the tiny figure of the sorcerer, its eyes
stupid and angry. An-other came pounding from behind the bowl, and an-other-great reptilian monsters
from another Age of Earth. And following them came those who controlled them. The horse was
snorting and prancing and des-perately trying to escape, but Elric managed to calm her down again as he
looked at the figures which now rested their hands on the obedient heads of the mon-sters. The figures
were even more terrifying than the reptiles-for although they walked upon two legs and had hands of
sorts they, too, were reptilian. They bore a peculiar resemblance to the dragon creatures and their size,
also, was many times greater than a man's. In their hands they had ornate instruments which could only
be weapons-instruments attached to their arms by spirals of golden metal. A hood of skin covered their
black and green heads and red eyes glared from the shadows of their faces.
Theleb K'aarna laughed. "I have achieved it. I have
destroyed the barrier between the planes and, thanks to the Lords of Chaos, have found allies which
Elric's sorcery cannot destroy because they do not obey the sorcerous rules of this plane! They are
invincible, in-vulnerable-and they obey only Theleb K'aarna!"
A huge snorting and screaming came from beasts and warriors alike.
"Now we shall go against Tanelorn!" Theleb
K'aarna shouted. "And with this power I shall return to Jharkor, to make fickle Yishana my own!"
Elric felt a certain sympathy for Theleb K'aarna at that moment. Without the aid of the Lords of Chaos,
his sorcery could not have achieved this. He had given himself up to them, had become one of their tools
all because of his weak-minded love for Jharkor's ageing queen. Elric knew he could not go against the
monsters and their monstrous riders. He must return to Tanelorn to warn his friends to leave the city, to
hope that he might find a means of returning these frightful inter-lopers back to their own plane. But then
the mare screamed suddenly and reared, maddened by the sights, the sounds and the smells she had been
forced to wit-ness. And the scream sounded in a sudden silence. The rearing horse revealed itself to
Theleb K'aarna as he turned his mad eyes in Elric's direction.
Elric knew he could not outride the monsters. He knew those weapons could easily destroy him from a
distance. He drew the black hellsword Stormbringer from its scabbard and it shouted as it came free. He
drove his spurs into the horse and he rode directly down the rocks towards the bowl while Theleb
K'aarna was still too startled to give orders to his new allies. His one hope was that he could destroy the
device-or at least break some important part of it-and in so doing return the monsters to their own plane.
His white face ghastly in the sorcerous darkness, his sword raised high, he galloped past Theleb K'aarna
and struck a mighty blow at the glass protecting the machine.
The Black Sword collided with the glass and sank
into it. Carried on by the momentum, Elric was flung from his saddle and he, too, passed through the
glass without apparently breaking it. He glimpsed the dread-ful planes and curves of the Doomed Folk's
device. His body struck them. He felt as if the fabric of his being was disintegrating. . .
. . . and then he lay sprawled upon sweet grass and there was nothing of the desert, of Theleb K'aarna, of
the pulsing machine, of the horrible beasts and their dreadful masters, only waving foliage and warm sunshine.
He heard birdsong and he heard a voice.
"The storm. It has gone. And you? Are you called Elric of Melnibone?"
He picked himself up and turned. A tall man stood before him. The man was clad in a conical silver helm
and was encased to the knee in a byrnie also of silver. A scarlet, longsleeved coat partly covered the
byrnie. The man bore a scabbarded longsword at his side. His legs were encased in breeks of soft leather
and there were boots of green-tinted doeskin on his feet. But Elric's attention was caught primarily by the 
man's features (which resembled those of a Melni-bonean much more than those of a true man) and the
fact that he wore upon his left hand a six-fingered gauntlet encrusted with dark jewels, while over his
right eye was a large patch which was also jewelled and matched the hand. The eye not covered by the
patch was large and slanting and had a yellow centre and purple surrounds.
"I am Elric of Melnibone," the albino agreed. "Are you to thank for rescuing me from those creatures
Theleb K'aarna summoned?"
The tall man shook his head. " 'Twas I that sum-moned you, but I know of no Theleb K'aarna. I was told
that I had only one opportunity to receive your aid and that I must take it in this particular place at this
particular time. I am called Corum Jhaelen Irsei-the Prince in the Scarlet Robe-and I ride upon a Quest of
grave import."
Elric frowned. The name had a half-familiar ring, but he could not place it. He half-recalled an old dream
. . .
"Where is this forest?" he asked, sheathing his sword.
"It is nowhere on your plane or in your time, Prince Elric. I summoned you to aid me in my battle against
the Lords of Chaos. Already I have been instrumental in destroying two of the Sword rulers-Arioch and
Xiombarg-but the third, the most powerful, re-mains. . . ."
"Arioch of Chaos-and Xiombarg? You have de-stroyed two of the most powerful members of the
Company of Chaos? Yet but a month since I spoke with Arioch. He is my patron. He . . ."
"There are many planes of existence," Prince Co-rum told him gently. "In some the Lords of Chaos are
strong. In some they are weak. In some, I have heard, they do not exist at all. You must accept that here
Arioch and Xiombarg have been banished so that effectively they no longer exist in my world. It is the
third of the Sword Rulers who threatens us now-the strongest, King Mabelode."
Elric frowned. "In my-plane-Mabelode is no stronger than Arioch and Xiombarg. This makes a travesty
of all my understanding. . . ."
"I will explain as much as I can," said Prince Corum. "For some reason Fate has selected me to be the
hero who must banish the domination of Chaos from the Fifteen Planes of Earth. I am at present
travelling on my way to seek a city which we call Tanelorn, where I hope to find aid. But my guide is a
prisoner in a castle close to here and before I can continue I must rescue him. I was told how I might
summon aid to help me effect this rescue and I used the spell to bring you to me. I was to tell you that if
you aided me, then you would aid yourself-that if I was successful then you would receive something
which would make your task easier."
"Who told you this?"
"A wise man."
Elric sat down on a fallen tree-trunk, his head in his hands. "I have been drawn away at an importunate
time," he said. "I pray that you speak the truth to me, Prince Corum." He looked up suddenly. "It is a
marvel that you speak at all-or at least that I understand you. How can this be?"
"I was informed that we should be able to com-municate easily because 'we are part of the same thing'.
Do not ask me to explain more, Prince Elric, for I know no more."
Elric shrugged. "Well this may be an illusion. I may have killed myself or become digested by that
machine of Theleb K'aarna's, but plainly I have no choice but to agree to aid you in the hope that I am, in
turn, aided."
Prince Corum left the clearing and returned with two horses, one white and one black. He offered the
reins of the black horse to Elric.
Elric settled himself in the unfamiliar saddle. "You spoke of Tanelorn. It is for the sake of Tanelorn that I
find myself in this dreamworld of yours."
Prince Corum's face was eager. "You know where Tanelorn lies?"
"In my own world, aye-but why should it lie in this one?"
"Tanelorn lies in all planes, though in different guises. There is one Tanelorn and it is eternal with many
forms."
They were riding through the gentle forest along a narrow track.
Elric accepted what Corum said. There was a dreamlike quality about his presence here and he decided
that he must regard all events here as he would regard the events in a dream. "Where go we now?" he
asked casually. "To the castle?"
Corum shook his head. "First we must have the Third Hero-the Many-named Hero."
"And will you summon him with sorcery, too?"
"I was told not. I was told that he would meet usdrawn
from whichever Age he exists in by the neces-sity to complete the Three Who Are One."
"And what mean these phrases? What is the Three Who Are One?"
"I know little more than you, friend Elric, save that it will need all three of us to defeat him who holds
my guide prisoner."
"Aye," murmured Elric feelingly, "and it will need more than that to save my Tanelorn from Theleb
K'aarna's reptiles. Even now they must march against the city."
CHAPTER FOUR
The Vanishing Tower.
The road widened and left the forest to wander among the heather of high and hilly moorland country.
Far away to the west they could see cliffs, and beyond the cliffs was the deeper blue of the ocean. A few
birds circled in the wide sky. It seemed a particularly peaceful world and Elric could hardly believe that
it was under attack from the forces of Chaos. As they rode Corum explained that his gaunt-let was not a
gauntlet at all, but the hand of an alien being, grafted on to his arm, just as his eye was an alien eye
which could see into a terrifying nether-world from which Corum could bring aid if he chose to do so.
"All you tell me makes the complicated sorceries and cosmologies of my world seem simple in comparison,"
Elric smiled as they crossed the peaceful landscape.
"It only seems complicated because it is strange," Corum said. "Your world would doubtless seem incomprehensible
to me if I were suddenly flung into it Besides," he laughed, "this particular plane is not
my world, either, though it resembles it more than do many. We have one thing in common, Elric, and
that is that we are both doomed to play a role in the con-stant struggle between the Lords of the Higher
Worlds-and we shall never understand why that struggle takes place, why it is eternal. We fight, we
suffer agonies of mind and soul, but we are never sure that our suffering is worthwhile."
"You are right," Elric said feelingly. "We have much in common, you and I, Corum."
Corum was about to reply when he saw something on the road ahead. It was a mounted warrior. He sat
perfectly still as if he awaited them. "Perhaps this is the Third of whom Bolorhiag spoke."
Cautiously, they rode forward.
The man they approached stared at them from a brooding face. He was as tall as them, but bulkier. His
skin was jet black and he wore upon his head and shoulders the stuffed head and pelt of a snarling bear.
His plate armour was also black, without insignia, and at his side was a great black-hilted sword in a
black scabbard. He rode a massive roan stallion and there was a heavy round shield attached to the back
of his saddle. As Elric and Corum came closer the man's handsome negroid features assumed an astonished
expression and he gasped.
"I know you! I know you both!"
Elric, too, felt he recognised the man, just as he had noticed something familiar in Corum's features.
"How came you here to Balwyn Moor, friend?"
Corum asked him.
The man looked about him as if in a daze. "Balwyn Moor? This is Balwyn Moor? I have been here but a
few moments. Before that I was-I was . . . Ah! The memory starts to fade again." He pressed a large
hand to his forehead. "A name-another name! No more! Elric! Corum! But I-I am now . . ."
"How do you know our names?" Elric asked him. A mood of dread had seized the albino. He felt that he
should not ask these questions, that he should not know the answers.
"Because-don't you see?-I am Elric-I am
Corum-oh, this is the worst agony. . . . Or, at least, I have been or am to be Elric or Corum. . . ."
"Your name, sir?" Corum said again.
"A thousand names are mine. A thousand heroes I
have been. Ah! I am-I am-John Daker-Erekose
-Urlik-many, many, many, more. . . . The memories,
the dreams, the existences." He stared at them suddenly through his pain-filled eyes. "Do you not
understand? Am I the only one to be doomed to understand? I am he who has been called the Cham-pion
Eternal-I am the hero who has existed forever -and, yes, I am Elric of Melnibone-Prince Corum Jhaelen
Irsei-I am you, also. We three are the same creature and a myriad other creatures besides. We three are
one thing-doomed to struggle forever and never understand why. Oh! My head pounds. Who tortures me
so? Who?
Elric's throat was dry. "You say you are another incarnations of myself!"
"If you would phrase it so! You are both other incarnations of myself!"
"So," said Corum, "that is what Bolorhiag meant by the Three Who Are One. We are all aspects of the
same man, yet we have tripled our strength because we have been drawn from three different ages. It is
the only power which might successfully go against Voilodion Ghagnasdiak of the Vanishing Tower."
"Is that the castle wherein your guide is impris-oned?" Elric asked, casting a glance of sympathy at the
groaning black man.
"Aye. The Vanishing Tower flickers from one plane to another, from one age to another, and exists in a
single location only for a few moments at a tune. But because we are three separate incarnations of a
single hero it is possible that we form a sorcery of some kind which will enable us to follow the tower
and attack it. Then, if we free my guide, we can con-tinue on to Tanelorn. . . ."
"Tanelorn?" The black man looked at Corum with hope suddenly flooding into his eyes. "I, too, seek
Tanelorn. Only there may I discover some remedy to my dreadful fate-which is to know all previous incarnations
and be hurled at random from one exis-tence to another! Tanelorn-I must find her!"
"I, too, must discover Tanelorn," Elric told him,
"for on my own plane her inhabitants are in great danger."
"So we have a common purpose as well as a com-mon identity," Corum said. "Therefore we shall fight
in concert, I pray. First we must free my guide, then go on to Tanelorn."
Til aid you willingly," said the black giant.
"And what shall we call you-you who are our-selves?" Corum asked him.
"Call me Erekose-though another name suggests itself to me-for it was as Erekose that I came closest to
knowing forgetfulness and the fulfilment of love."
"Then you are to be envied, Erekose," Elric said meaningly, "for at least you have come close to forgetfulness.
. . ."
"You have no inkling of what it is I must forget," the black giant told him. He shook his reins. "Now
Corum-which way to the Vanishing Tower?"
"This road leads to it We ride down now to Darkvale, I believe."
Elric's mind could hardly contain the significance of
what he had heard. It suggested that the universe-or
the multiverse, as Myshella had named it-was divided
into infinite layers of existence, that time was
virtually a meaningless concept save where it related
to one man's life or one short period of history. And
there were planes of existence where the Cosmic Balance
was not known at all-or so Corum had suggested-and
other planes where the Lords of the
Higher Worlds had far greater powers than they had
on his own world. He was tempted to consider the
idea of forgetting Theleb K'aarna, Myshella, Tanelorn
and the rest and devote himself to the exploration
of all these infinite worlds. But then he knew
that this could not be for, if Erekose spoke the truth,
then he-or something which was essentially himself
-existed in all these planes already. Whatever force
it was which he named "Fate" had admitted him to
this plane to fulfil one purpose. An important purpose
affecting the destinies of a thousand planes it must surely be if it brought him together in three
separate incarnations. He glanced curiously at the black giant on his left, at the maimed man with the
jewelled hand and eye on his right. Were they really himself?
Now he fancied he felt some of the desperation Erekose must feel-to remember all those other incarnations,
all those other mistakes, all that other pointless conflict-and never to know the purpose for it
all, if purpose indeed there were.
"Darkvale," said Corum pointing down the hill.
The road ran steeply until it passed between two looming cliffs, disappearing in shadow. There was
something particularly gloomy about the place.
"I am told there was a village here once," Corum said to them. "An uninviting spot, eh, brothers?"
"I have seen worse," murmured Erekose. "Come, let's get all this done with. . . ." He spurred his roan
ahead of the others and galloped at great speed down the steep path. They followed his example and
soon they had passed between the lowering cliffs and could barely see ahead of them as they continued
to follow the road through the shadows.
And now Elric saw ruins huddled close to the foot of the cliffs on either side. Oddly twisted rums which
had not been the result of age or warfare-these ruins were warped, fused, as if Chaos had touched them
while passing through the vale.
Corum had been studying the ruins carefully and at length he reined in. "There," he said. "That pit Here
is where we must wait."
Elric looked at the pit. It was ragged and deep and the earth in it seemed freshly turned as if it had been
but lately dug. "What must we wait for, Friend Corum?"
"For the Tower," said Prince Corum. "I would guess that this is where it appears when it is in this plane."
"And when will it appear?"
"At no particular time. We must wait. And then, as soon as we see it, we must rush it and attempt to
enter before it vanishes again, moving on to the next plane."
Erekose's face was impassive. He dismounted and sat on the hard ground with his back against a slab of
rock which had once belonged to a house.
"You seem more patient than I, Erekose," said Elric.
"I have learned patience, for I have lived since time began and will live on at the end of time."
Elric got down from his own black horse and loos-ened its girth strap while Corum prowled about the
edge of the pit. "Who told you that the Tower would appear here?" Elric asked him.
"A sorcerer who doubtless serves Law as I do, for I am a mortal doomed to battle Chaos."
"As am I," said Erekose the Champion Eternal.
"As am I," said Elric of Melnibone, "though I am sworn to serve it."
Elric looked at his two companions and it was possible to believe that these were two incarnations of
himself. Certainly their lives, their struggles, their personalities, to some extent, were very similar.
"And why do you seek Tanelorn, Erekose?" he asked.
"I have been told that I may find peace there-and wisdom-a means of returning to the world of the Eldren
where dwells the woman I love, for it has been said that since Tanelorn exists in all planes at all times it
is easier for a man who dwells there to pass between the planes, discover the particular one he seeks. 
What interest have you in Tanelorn, Lord Elric?"
"I know Tanelorn and I know that you are right to
seek it. My mission seems to be the defence of that
city upon my own plane-but even now my friends
may be destroyed by that which has been brought
against them. I pray Corum is right and that in the
Vanishing Tower I shall find a means to defeat Theleb K'aarna's beasts and their masters."
Corum raised his jewelled hand to his jewelled eye. "I seek Tanelorn for I have heard the city can aid
me in my struggle against Chaos."
"But Tanelorn will fight neither Law nor Chaos-that is why she exists for eternity," Elric said.
"Aye. Like Erekose I do not seek swords but wis-dom."
Night fell and Darkvale grew gloomier. While the others watched the pit Elric tried to sleep, but his fears
for Tanelorn were too great. Would Myshella try to defend the city? Would Moonglum and Rackhir die?
And what could he possibly find in the Vanish-ing Tower which would aid him? He heard the murmuring
of conversation as his other selves discussed how Darkvale had come to exist.
"I heard that Chaos once attacked the town which at that time lay in a quiet valley," Corum told Erekose.
"The tower was then the property of a knight who gave shelter to one whom Chaos hated. They brought
a huge force of creatures against Darkvale, raising and compressing the walls of the valley, but the
knight sought the aid of Law who enabled him to shift his tower into another dimen-sion. Then Chaos
decreed that the tower should shift forever, never being on one plane longer than a few hours, usually for
never more than a few moments. The knight and the fugitive went mad at last and killed each other.
Then Voilodion Ghagnasdiak found the tower and became resident therein. Too late he realised his
mistake as he was shifted from his own plane to an alien one. Since then he has been too fearful to leave
the tower but desperate for company. He has taken to the habit of capturing whomever he can and
forcing them to be his companions in the Vanishing Tower until they bore him. When they bore him, he
slays them."
"And your guide may soon be slain? What manner of creature is this Voilodion Ghagnasdiak?"
"He is a monstrous evil creature commanding great powers of destruction, that is all I know."
"Which is why the gods have seen fit to call up three aspects of myself to attack the Vanishing Tower,"
said Erekose. "It must be important to them."
"It is to me," said Corum, "for the guide is also my friend and the very existence of the Fifteen Planes is
threatened if I cannot find Tanelorn soon."
Elric heard Erekose laugh bitterly. "Why cannot I-we-ever be faced with a small problem, a do-mestic
problem. Why are we forever involved with the destiny of the universe?"
Corum replied just as Elric began to nod into a half-doze. "Perhaps domestic problems are worse. Who
knows?"
CHAPTER FIVE
Jhary-a-Conel
"It is here! Hasten Elric!"
Elric sprang up.
It was dawn. He had already stood watch once during the night.
He drew his Black Sword from its scabbard noticing with some astonishment that Erekose had already
drawn his own blade and that it was almost identical to his own.
There was the Vanishing Tower.
Corum was running towards it even now.
The tower was in fact a small castle of grey and solid stone, but about its battlements played lights and
its outline was not altogether clear at certain sections of its walls.
Elric ran beside Erekose.
"He keeps the door open to lure his 'guests' in," panted the black giant. "It is our only advantage, I think."
The tower flickered.
"Hasten!" Corum cried again and the Prince in the Scarlet Robe dashed into the darkness of the doorway.
"Hasten!"
They ran into a small antechamber which was lit by a great oil lamp hanging from the ceiling by chains.
The door closed suddenly behind them.
Elric glanced at Erekose's tense black features, at
Corum's blemished face. All had swords ready, but
now a profound silence filled the hall. Without speaking
Corum pointed through a window-slit. The view beyond
it had changed. They seemed now to be looking out over blue sea.
"Jhary!" Corum called. "Jhary-a-Conel!"
A faint sound came back. It might have been a reply or it might have been the squeak of a rat in the
castle walls. "Jhary!" Corum cried again. "Voilodion Ghagnasdiak? Am I to be thwarted? Have you left
this place?"
"I have not left it. What do you want with me?" The voice came from the next room. Warily the three
heroes who were one hero went forward.
Something like lightning flickered in the room and in its ghastly glare Elric saw Voilodion Ghagnasdiak.
He was a dwarf clad all in puffed multicoloured silks, furs and satins, a tiny sword in his hand. His head
was too large for his body, but it was a handsome head with thick black eyebrows which met in the
middle. He smiled at them. "At last someone new to relieve my ennui. But lay down your swords,
gentlemen, I beg you, for you are to be my guests."
"I know what fate your guests may expect," Corum said. "Know this, Voilodion Ghagnasdiak, we have
come to release Jhary-a-Conel whom you hold prisoner. Give him up to us and we will not harm you."
The dwarf's handsome features grinned cheerfully at these words. "But I am very powerful. You cannot
defeat me. Watch."
He waved his sword and more lightning lashed about the room. Elric half-raised his sword to ward it off,
but it never quite touched him. He stepped angrily towards the dwarf. "Know this, Voilodion Ghagnasdiak,
I am Elric of Melnibone" and I have much power. I bear the Black Sword and it thirsts to drink
your soul unless you release Prince Corum's friend!"
Again the dwarf laughed. "Swords? What power have they?"
"Our swords are not ordinary blades," Erekose said.
"And we have been brought here by forces you could
not comprehend-wrenched from our own ages by
the power of the gods themselves-specifically to de-mand that this Jhary-a-Conel be given up to us."
"You are deceived," said Voilodion Ghagnasdiak, "or you seek to deceive me. This Jhary is a witty
fellow, I'd agree, but what interest could gods have in him?"
Elric raised Stormbringer. The Black Sword moaned in anticipation of a quenching.
Then the dwarf produced a tiny yellow ball from nowhere and flung it at Elric. It bounced on his forehead
and he was flung backward across the room, Stormbringer clattering from his hand. Dizzily Elric
tried to rise, reached out to take his sword, but he was too weak. On impulse he began to cry for the aid
of Arioch, but then he remembered that Arioch had been banished from this world. There were no
supernatural allies to call upon here-none but the sword and he could not reach the sword.
Erekose leapt backward and kicked the Black Sword in Elric's direction. As the albino's hand encircled
the hilt he felt strength come back to him, but it was no more than ordinary mortal strength. He climbed
to bis feet.
Corum remained where he was. The dwarf was still laughing. Another ball appeared in his hand. Again
he flung it at Elric, but this time he brought up the Black Sword in time and deflected it. It bounced
across the room and exploded against the far wall. Something black writhed from the fire.
"It is dangerous to destroy the globes," said Voilo-dion Ghagnasdiak equably, "for now what is in them 
will destroy you."
The black thing grew. The flames died.
"I am free," said a voice.
"Aye." Voilodion Ghagnasdiak was gleeful. 'Free to kill these fools who reject my hospitality!"
"Free to be slain," Elric replied as he watched the thing take shape.
At first it seemed all made of flowing hair which
gradually compressed until it formed the outline of a
creature with the heavily muscled body of a gorilla,
though the hide was thick and warted like that of a rhinoceros. From behind the shoulders curved great
black wings and on the neck was the snarling head of a tiger. It clutched a long, scythe-like weapon in its
hairy hands. The tiger head roared and the scythe swept out suddenly, barely missing Elric.
Erekose and Corum began to move forward to Elric's aid. Elric heard Corum cry: "My eye-it will not see
into the netherworld. I cannot summon help!" It seemed that Corum's sorcerous powers were also limited
on this plane. Then Voilodion Ghagnasdiak threw a yellow ball at the black giant and the pale man with
the jewelled hand. Both barely managed to de-flect the missiles and, in so doing, caused them to burst.
Immediately shapes emerged and became two more of the winged tiger-men and Elric's allies were
forced to defend themselves.
As he dodged another swing of the scythe Elric tried to think of some rune which would summon supernatural
aid to him, but he could think of none which would work here. He thrust at the tiger-man but his
blow was blocked by the scythe. His opponent was enormously strong and swift. The black wings began
to beat and the snarling thing flapped upwards to the ceiling, hovered for a moment and then rushed
down on Elric with its scythe whirling, a chilling scream coming from its fanged mouth, its yellow eyes
glaring.
Elric felt something close to panic. Stormbringer was not supplying him with the strength he expected.
Its powers were diminished on this plane. He barely man-aged to dodge the scythe again and lash at the
crea-ture's exposed thigh. The blade bit but no blood came. The tiger-man did not seem to notice the
wound.
Again it began to flap towards the ceiling.
Elric saw that his companions were experiencing a similar plight. Corum's face was full of consternation
as if he had expected an easy victory and now foresaw defeat.
Meanwhile Voilodion Ghagnasdiak continued to
scream his glee and flung more of the yellow balls about
the room. As each one burst there emerged another snarling winged tiger creature. The room was full of
them. Elric, Erekose and Corum backed to the far wall as the monsters bore down on them, their ears full
of the fearful beating of the giant wings, the harsh screams of hatred.
"I fear I have summoned you two to your destruc-tion," Corum panted. "I had no warning that our
powers would be so limited here. The tower must shift so fast that even the ordinary laws of sorcery do
not apply within its walls."
"They seem to work well enough for the dwarf," Elric said as he brought up his blade to block first one
scythe and then another. "If I could slay but a sin-gle . . ."
His back was hard against the wall, a scythe nicked his cheek and drew blood, another tore his cloak,
another slashed his arm. The tiger faces were grinning now as they closed in.
Elric aimed a blow at the head of the nearest crea-ture, struck off its ear so that it howled. Stormbringer
howled back and stabbed at the thing's throat.
But the sword hardly penetrated and served only to put the tiger-man slightly off balance.
As the thing staggered Elric wrenched the scythe from its hands and reversed the weapon, drawing the
blade across the chest. The tiger-man screamed as blood spurted from the wound.
"I was right!" Elric shouted at the others. "Only their own weapons can harm them!" He moved for-ward
with the scythe in one hand and Stormbringer in the other. The tiger-men backed off and then began to 
flap upwards to hover near the ceiling.
Elric ran towards Voilodion Ghagnasdiak. The dwarf gave a yell of terror and disappeared through a
doorway too small easily to admit Elric.
Then, with thundering wings, the tiger creatures descended again.
This tune the other two strove to capture scythes
from their enemies. Driving back those who attacked
him, the albino prince took Corum's main assailant from behind and the thing fell with its head sliced
off. Corum sheathed his longsword and plucked up the scythe, killing a third tiger-man almost
immediately and kicking the fallen scythe towards Erekose. Black feath-ers drifted in the stinking air.
The flagstones of the floor were slippery with blood. The three heroes drove a path through their enemies
into the smaller room they had lately left. Still the tiger creatures came on, but now they had to pass
through the door and this was more easily defended.
Glancing back Elric saw the window slit of the tower. Outside the scenery altered constantly as the
Vanishing Tower continued its erratic progress through the planes of existence. But the three were
wearying and all had lost some blood from minor wounds. Scythes clashed on scythes as the fight
continued, wings beat loudly and the snarling faces spat at them and spoke words which could barely be
understood. Without the strength supplied him by his hell-forged sword Elric was weakening rapidly.
Twice he staggered and was borne up by the others. Was he to die in some alien world with his friends
never knowing how he had perished? But then he remembered that his friends were even now under
attack from the reptilian beasts Theleb K'aarna had sent against Tanelorn, that they, too, would soon be
dead. This knowledge gave him a little more strength and enabled him to sweep his scythe deep into the
belly of another tiger creature.
This gap in the ranks of the sorcerous things enabled him to see the small doorway on the far side of the
other room. Voilodion Ghagnasdiak was crouched there, hurling still more of the yellow globes. New
winged tiger-men grew up to replace those who had fallen.
But then Elric heard Voilodion Ghagnasdiak give a
yell and saw that something was covering his face. It
was a black and white animal with small black wings
which beat in the air. Some offspring of the beasts who
attacked him? Elric could not tell. But Voilodion Ghagnasdiak
was plainly terrified of it, trying to drag it from his face.
Another figure appeared behind the dwarf. Bright eyes peered from an intelligent face framed by long
black hair. He was dressed as ostentatiously as the dwarf, but he was unarmed. He was calling to Elric
and the albino strained to catch the words even as another tiger-creature came at him.
Corum saw the newcomer now. "Jhary!" he shouted.
"The one you came to save?" Elric asked.
"Aye."
Elric made to press forward into the room, but Jhary-a-Conel waved him back. "No! No! Stay there!"
Elric frowned, was about to ask why when he was attacked from two sides by the tiger creatures and had
to retreat, slashing his scythe this way and that.
"Link arms!" Jhary-a-Conel cried. "Corum in the centre-and you two draw your swords!"
Elric was panting. He slew another tiger-man and felt a new pain shoot through his leg. Blood gushed
from his calf.
Voilodion Ghagnasdiak was still struggling with the thing which clung to his face.
"Hurry!" cried Jhary-a-Conel. "It is your only chance-and mine!"
Elric looked at Corum.
"He is wise, my friend," Corum said. "He knows many things which we do not. Here, I will stand in the
centre."
Erekose linked his brawny arm with Corum's and Elric did the same on the other side. Erekose drew his 
sword in his left hand and Elric brought forth Storm-bringer in his right.
And something began to happen. A sense of energy came back, then a sense of great physical well-being.
Elric looked at his companions and laughed. It was al-most as if by combining their powers they had
made them four tunes stronger-as if they had become one entity.
A peculiar feeling of euphoria filled Elric and he
knew that Erekose had spoken the truth-that they were three aspects of the same being.
"Let us finish them!" he shouted-and he saw that they shouted the same. Laughing the linked three strode
into the chamber and now the two swords wounded whenever they struck, slaying swiftly and bringing
them more energy still.
The winged tiger-men became frantic, flapping about the room as the Three Who Were One pursued
them. All three were drenched in their own blood and that of their enemies, all three were laughing,
invulnerable, acting completely in unison.
And as they moved the room itself began to shake.
They heard Voilodion Ghagnasdiak screaming.
"The tower! The tower! This will destroy the tower!"
Elric looked up from the last corpse. It was true that the tower was swaying wildly from side to side like
a ship in a storm.
Jhary-a-Conel pushed past the dwarf and entered the room of death. The sight seemed obnoxious to him
but he controlled his feelings. "It is true. The sorcery we have worked today must have its effect.
Whiskers-to me!"
The thing on Voilodion Ghagnasdiak's face flew into the air and settled on Jhary's shoulder. Elric saw
that it was a small black and white cat, ordinary in every detail save for its neat pair of wings which it
was now folding.
Voilodion Ghagnasdiak sat crumpled in the doorway and he was weeping through sightless eyes. Tears
of blood flowed down his handsome face.
Elric ran back into the other room, breaking his link with Corum. He peered through the window slit. But
now there was nothing but a wild eruption of mauve and purple cloud.
He gasped. "We are in limbo!"
Silence fell. Still the tower swayed. The lights were
extinguished by a strange wind blowing through the
rooms and the only illumination came from outside where the mist still swirled.
Jhary-a-Conel was frowning to himself as he joined Elric at the window.
"How did you know what to do?" Elric asked him.
"I knew because I know you, Elric of Melnibone"-just as I know Erekose there-for I travel in many ages
and on many planes. That is why I am sometimes called Companion to Champions. I must find my
sword and my sack-also my hat. Doubtless all are in Voilodion's vault with his other loot."
"But the tower? If it is destroyed shall we, too, be destroyed?"
"A possibility. Come, friend Elric, help me seek my hat."
"At such a time, you look for a-hat?"
"Aye." Jhary-a-Conel returned to the larger room, stroking the black and white cat. Voilodion Ghagnasdiak
was still there and he was still weeping. "Prince Corum-Lord Erekose-will you come with me, too."
Corum and the black giant joined Elric and they squeezed into the narrow passage, inching their way
along until it widened to reveal a flight of stairs leading downward. The tower shuddered again. Jhary lit
a brand and removed it from its place in the wall. He began to descend the steps, the three heroes behind
him.
A slab of masonry fell from the roof and crashed just in front of Elric. "I would prefer to seek a means of
escape from the tower," he said to Jhary-a-Conel. "If it falls now, we shall be buried."
"Trust me, Prince Elric," was all that Jhary would say.
And because Jhary had already shown himself to possess great knowledge Elric allowed the dandy to 
lead him further into the bowels of the tower.
At last they reached a circular chamber and in it was set a huge metal door.
"Voilodion's vault," Jhary told them. "Here you will
find all the things you seek. And I, I hope, will find my
bat. The hat was specially made and is the only one which properly matches my other clothes. . . ."
"How do we open a door like that?" Erekose asked. "It is made of steel, surely!" He hefted the black
blade he still bore in his left hand.
"If you link arms again, my friends," Jhary suggested with a kind of mocking deference, "I will show
you how the door may be opened."
Once again Elric, Corum and Erekose linked their arms together. Once again the supernatural strength
seemed to flow through them and they laughed at each other, knowing that they were all part of the same
creature.
Jhary's voice seemed to come faintly to Elric's ears. "And now, Prince Corum, if you would strike with
your foot once upon the door. . . ."
They moved until they were close to the door. That part of them which was Corum struck out with his
foot at the slab of steel-and the door fell inward as if made of the lightest wood.
This tune Elric was much more reluctant to break the link which held them. But he did so at last as Jhary
stepped into the vault chuckling to himself.
The tower lurched. All three were flung after Jhary into Voilodion's vault. Elric fell heavily against a
great golden chair of a kind he had once seen used as an elephant saddle. He looked around the vault. It
was full of valuables, of clothes, shoes, weapons. He felt nau-seated as he realised that these had been
the posses-sions of all those Voilodion had chosen to call his guests.
Jhary pulled a bundle from under a pile of furs. "Look, Prince Elric. These are what you will need where
Tanelorn is concerned." It seemed to be a bunch of long sticks rolled in thin sheets of metal.
Elric accepted the heavy bundle. "What is it?"
"They are the banners of bronze and the arrows of quartz. Useful weapons against the reptilian men of
Pio and their mounts."
"You know of those reptiles? You know of Theleb K'aarna, too?"
"The sorcerer of Pan Tang? Aye."
Elric stared almost suspiciously at Jhary-a-Conel.
"How can you know all this?"
"I have told you. I have lived many lives as a Friend of Heroes. Unwrap this bundle when you return to
Tanelorn. Use the arrows of quartz like spears. To use the banners of bronze, merely unfurl them. Aha!"
Jhary reached behind a sack of jewels and came up with a somewhat dusty hat. He smacked off the dust
and placed it on his head. "Ah!" He bent again and displayed a goblet. He offered this to Prince Corum.
"Take it. It will prove useful, I think."
From another corner Jhary took a small sack and put it on his shoulder. Almost as an afterthought he
hunted about in a chest of jewels and found a gleaming ring of unnamable stones and peculiar metal.
"This is your reward, Erekose, in helping to free me from my captor."
Erekose smiled. "I have the feeling you needed no help, young man."
"You are mistaken, friend Erekose. I doubt if I have ever been in greater peril." He looked vaguely about
the vault, staggering as the floor tilted alarmingly.
Elric said: "We should take steps to leave."
"Exactly." Jhary-a-Conel crossed swiftly to the fat side of the vault. "The last thing. In his pride
Voilodion showed me his possessions, but he did not know the value of all of them."
"What do you mean?" asked the Prince in the Scar-let Robe.
"He killed the traveller who brought this with him. The traveller was right in assuming he had the means
to stop the tower from vanishing, but he did not have time to use it before Voilodion had slain him."
Jhary picked up a small staff coloured a dull ochre. "Here it is. The Runestaff. Hawkmoon had this with 
him when I travelled with him to the Dark Empire. . . ."
Noticing their puzzlement, Jhary-a-Conel, Companion
to Champions, apologised. "I am sorry. I some-times forget that not all of us have memories of other
careers. . . ."
"What is the Runestaff?" Corum asked.
"I remember one description-but I am poor at naming and explaining things. . . ."
"That has not escaped my notice," Elric said, al-most smiling.
"It is an object which can only exist under a certain set of spatial and temporal laws. In order to continue
to exist, it must exert a field in which it can contain itself. That field must accord with those laws-the
same laws under which we best survive."
More masonry fell.
"The tower is breaking up!" Erekose growled.
Jhary stroked the dull ochre staff. "Please gather near me, my friends."
The three heroes stood around him. And then the roof of the tower fell in. But it did not fall on them for
they stood suddenly on firm ground breathing fresh air. But there was blackness all around them. "Do
not step outside this small area," Jhary warned, "or you will be doomed. Let the Runestaff seek what we
seek."
They saw the ground change colour, breathed warmer, then colder, air. It was as if they moved from
plane to plane of the universe, never seeing more than the few feet of ground upon which they stood.
And then there was harsh desert sand beneath their feet and Jhary shouted. "Now!" The four of them
rushed out of the area and into the blackness to find themselves suddenly in sunlight beneath a sky like
beaten metal.
"A desert," Erekose murmured. "A vast desert...."
Jhary smiled. "Do you not recognise it, friend Elric?"
"Is it the Sighing Desert?"
"Listen."
And sure enough Elric heard the familiar sound of the wind as it made its mournful passage across the
sands. A little way away he saw the Runestaff where they had left it. Then it was gone.
"Are you all to come with me to the defence of Tanelorn?" he asked Jhary.
Jhary shook his head. "No. We go the other way. We go to seek the device Theleb K'aarna activated
with the help of the Lords of Chaos. Where lies it?"
Elric tried to get his bearings. He lifted a hesitant finger. "That way, I think."
"Then let us go to it now."
"But I must try to help Tanelorn."
"You must destroy the device after we have used it, friend Elric, lest Theleb K'aarna or his like try to activate
it again."
"But Tanelorn . . ."
"I do not believe that Theleb K'aarna and his beasts have yet reached the city."
"Not reached it! So much time has passed!"
"Less than a day."
Elric rubbed at his face. He said reluctantly: "Very well. I will take you to the machine."
"But if Tanelorn lies so near," Corum said to Jhary, "why seek it elsewhere?"
"Because this is not the Tanelorn we wish to find," Jhary told him.
"It will suit me," Erekose said. "I will remain with Elric. Then, perhaps . . ."
A look almost of terror spread over Jhary's features then. He said sadly: "My friend-already much of
time and space is threatened with destruction. Eternal barriers could soon fall-the fabric of the multiverse
could decay. You do not understand. Such a thing as has happened in the Vanishing Tower can only
happen once or twice in an eternity and even then it is danger-ous to all concerned. You must do as I say.
I promise that you will have just as good a chance of finding Tanelorn where I take you. Your 
opportunity lies in Elric's future."
Erekose bowed his head. "Very well."
"Come," Elric said impatiently, beginning to strike off to the North-east. "For all your talk of Tune, there
is precious little left for me."
CHAPTER SIX
Pale Lord Shouting in Sunlight
The machine in the bowl was where Elric had last seen it, just before he had attacked it and found
himself plunged into Corum's world.
Jhary seemed completely familiar with it and soon had its heart beating strongly. He shepherded the
other two up to it and made them stand with their backs against the crystal. Then he handed something to
Elric. It was a small vial.
"When we have departed," he said, "hurl this through the top of the bowl, then take your horse which I
see is yonder and ride as fast as you can for Tanelorn. Follow these instructions perfectly and you will
serve us all."
Elric accepted the vial. "Very well."
"And," Jhary said finally as he took his place with the others, "please give my compliments to my
brother Moonglum."
"You know him? What-?"
"Farewell, Elric! We shall doubtless meet many times in the future, though we may not recognise each
other."
Then the beating of the thing in the bowl grew louder and the ground shook and the strange darkness
surrounded it-then the three figures had gone. Swiftly Elric hurled the vial upwards so that it fell through
the opening of the bowl, then he ran to where his golden mare was tethered, leapt into the saddle with the
bun-dle Jhary had given him under his arm, and galloped as fast as he could go towards Tanelorn.
Behind him the beating suddenly ceased. The darkness
disappeared. A tense silence fell. Then Elric heard something like a giant's gasp and blinding blue
light filled the desert. He looked back. Not only the bowl and the device had gone-so also had the rocks
which had once surrounded it.
He came up behind them at last, just before they reached the walls of Tanelorn. Elric saw warriors on
those walls.
The massive reptilian monsters bore their equally re-pulsive masters upon their backs, their feet leaving
deep marks in the sand as they moved. And Theleb K'aarna rode at their head on a chestnut stallion-and
there was something draped across his saddle.
Then a shadow passed over Elric's head and he looked up. It was the metal bird which had borne
Myshella away. But it was riderless. It wheeled over the heads of the lumbering reptiles whose masters
raised their strange weapons and sent hissing streams of fire in its direction, driving it higher into the
sky. Why was the bird here and not Myshella? A peculiar cry came again and again from its metal throat
and Elric realised what that cry resembled-the pathetic sound of a mother bird whose young is in danger.
He stared hard at the bundle over Theleb K'aarna's saddle and suddenly he knew what it must be.
Myshella herself! Doubtless she had given Elric up for dead and had tried to go against Theleb K'aarna
only to be beaten.
Anger boiled in the albino. All his intense hatred for the sorcerer revived and his hand went to his sword.
But then he looked again at the vulnerable walls of Tanelorn, at his brave companions on the
battlements, and he knew that his first duty was to help them.
But how was he to reach the walls without Theleb
K'aarna seeing him and destroying him before he could
bring the banners of bronze to his friends? He prepared
to spur his horse forward and hope that he would be
lucky. Then a shadow passed over his head again and
he saw that it was the metal bird flying low, something
CHAPTER SIX
Pale Lord Shouting in Sunlight
The machine in the bowl was where Elric had last seen it, just before he had attacked it and found
himself plunged into Corum's world.
Jhary seemed completely familiar with it and soon had its heart beating strongly. He shepherded the
other two up to it and made them stand with their backs against the crystal. Then he handed something to
Elric. It was a small vial.
"When we have departed," he said, "hurl this through the top of the bowl, then take your horse which I
see is yonder and ride as fast as you can for Tanelorn. Follow these instructions perfectly and you will
serve us all."
Elric accepted the vial. "Very well."
"And," Jhary said finally as he took his place with the others, "please give my compliments to my
brother Moonglum."
"You know him? What-?"
"Farewell, Elric! We shall doubtless meet many times in the future, though we may not recognise each
other."
Then the beating of the thing in the bowl grew louder and the ground shook and the strange darkness
surrounded it-then the three figures had gone. Swiftly Elric hurled the vial upwards so that it fell through
the opening of the bowl, then he ran to where his golden mare was tethered, leapt into the saddle with the
bun-dle Jhary had given him under his arm, and galloped as fast as he could go towards Tanelorn.
Behind him the beating suddenly ceased. The darkness
disappeared. A tense silence fell. Then Elric heard
something like a giant's gasp and blinding blue light
filled the desert. He looked back. Not only the bowl
and the device had gone-so also had the rocks which
had once surrounded it
He came up behind them at last, just before they reached the walls of Tanelorn. Elric saw warriors on
those walls.
The massive reptilian monsters bore their equally re-pulsive masters upon their backs, their feet leaving
deep marks in the sand as they moved. And Theleb K'aarna rode at their head on a chestnut stallion-and
there was something draped across his saddle.
Then a shadow passed over Elric's head and he looked up. It was the metal bird which had borne
Myshella away. But it was riderless. It wheeled over the heads of the lumbering reptiles whose masters
raised their strange weapons and sent hissing streams of fire in its direction, driving it higher into the
sky. Why was the bird here and not Myshella? A peculiar cry came again and again from its metal throat
and Elric realised what that cry resembled-the pathetic sound of a mother bird whose young is in danger.
He stared hard at the bundle over Theleb K'aarna's saddle and suddenly he knew what it must be.
Myshella herself! Doubtless she had given Elric up for dead and had tried to go against Theleb K'aarna
only to be beaten.
Anger boiled in the albino. All his intense hatred for the sorcerer revived and his hand went to his sword.
But then he looked again at the vulnerable walls of Tanelorn, at his brave companions on the
battlements, and he knew that his first duty was to help them.
But how was he to reach the walls without Theleb
K'aarna seeing him and destroying him before he could
bring the banners of bronze to his friends? He prepared
to spur his horse forward and hope that he would be
lucky. Then a shadow passed over his head again and
he saw that it was the metal bird flying low, something
like agony in its emerald eyes. He heard its voice.
"Prince Elric! We must save her."
He shook his head as the bird settled in the sand.
"First I must save Tanelorn."
"I will help you," said the bird of gold and silver and brass. "Climb up into my saddle."
Elric cast a glance towards the distant monsters. Their attention was now wholly upon the city they intended
to destroy. He jumped from his horse and crossed the sand to clamber into the onyx saddle of the
bird. The wings began to clash and with a rush they swept into the sky, turning towards Tanelorn.
More streaks of fire hissed around them as they neared the city, but the bird flew rapidly from side to
side and avoided them. Down they drifted now to the gentle city, to land on the wall itself.
"Elric!" Moonglum came running along the defences.
"We were told you were dead!"
"By whom?"
"By Myshella and by Theleb K'aarna when he de-manded our surrender."
"I suppose they could only believe that," Elric said, separating the staffs around which were furled the
thin sheets of bronze. "Here, you must take these. I am told that they will be useful against the reptiles of
Pio. Un-furl them along the walls. Greetings, Rackhir." He handed the astounded Red Archer one of the
banners.
"You do not stay to fight with us?" Rackhir asked.
Elric looked down at the twelve slender arrows in his hand. Each one was perfectly carved from multicoloured
quartz so that even the fletchings seemed like real feathers. "No," he said. "I hope to rescue
Myshella from Theleb K'aarna-and I can use these arrows better from the air, also."
"Myshella, thinking you dead, seemed to go mad,"
Rackhir told him. "She conjured up various sorceries
against Theleb K'aarna-but he retaliated. At last she
flung herself from the saddle of that bird you rideflung
herself upon him armed only with a knife. But he
overpowered her and has threatened to slay her if we
do not allow ourselves to be killed without retaliating. I know that he will kill Myshella anyway. I have
been in something of a quandary of conscience. . . ."
"I will resolve that quandary, I hope." Elric stroked the metallic neck of the bird. "Come, my friend, into
the air again. Remember, Rackhir-unfurl the banners along the walls as soon as I have gamed a good
height."
The Red Archer nodded, his face puzzled, and once again Elric was rising into the air, the arrows of
quartz clutched in his left hand.
He heard Theleb K'aarna's laughter from below. He saw the monstrous beasts moving inexorably towards
the walls. The gates opened suddenly and a group of horsemen rode out. Plainly they had hoped to
sacrifice themselves in order to save Tanelorn and Rackhir had not had time to warn them of Elric's message.
The riders galloped wildly towards the reptilian monsters of Pio, their swords and lances waving, their
yells rising to where Elric drifted high above. The mon-sters roared and opened their huge jaws, their
masters pointed their ornate weapons at the horsemen of Tane-lorn. Flames burst from the muzzles, the
riders shrieked as they were devoured by the dazzling heat.
In horror Elric directed the metal bird downwards. And at last Theleb K'aarna saw him and reined in his
horse, his eyes wide with fear and rage. "You are dead! You are dead!"
The great wings beat at the air as the bird hovered over Theleb K'aarna's head. "I am alive, Theleb
K'aarna-and I come to destroy you at long last! Give Myshella up to me."
A cunning expression came over the sorcerer's face. "No. Destroy me and she is also destroyed. Beings
of Pio-turn your full strength against Tane-lorn. Raze it utterly and show this fool what we can do!"
Each of the reptilian riders directed their oddly shaped weapons at Tanelorn where Rackhir, Moon-glum
and the rest waited on the battlements.
"No!" shouted Elric. "You cannot-"
There was something flashing on the battlements.
They were unfurling at last the banners of bronze. And as each banner was unfurled a pure golden light
blazed out from it until there was a vast wall of light stretching the whole length of the defences, making
it impossible to see the banners themselves or the men who held them. The beings of Pio aimed their
weap-ons and released streams of fire at the barrier of light which immediately repelled them.
Theleb K'aarna's face was suffused with anger. "What is this? Our earthly sorcery cannot stand against
the power of Pio!"
Elric smiled savagely. "This is not our sorcery-it is another sorcery which can resist that of Pio! Now,
Theleb K'aarna, give up Myshella!"
"No! You are not protected as Tanelorn is pro-tected. Beings of Pio-destroy him!"
And, as the weapons began to be directed at him, Elric flung the first of the arrows of quartz. It flew truedirectly
into the face of the leading reptilian rider. A high whining escaped the rider's throat as it raised
its webbed hands towards the arrow embedded in its eye. The beast the rider sat upon reared, for it was
plain that it was only barely controlled. It turned away from the blinding light from Tanelorn and it
galloped at earth-shaking speed away into the desert, the dead rider falling from its back. A streak of fire
barely missed Elric and he was forced to take the bird up higher, flinging down another arrow and seeing
it strike a rider's heart. Again the mount went out of control and followed its companion into the
desert.
But there were ten more of the riders and each now
turned his weapon against Elric, though finding it
hard to aim as all the mounts grew restive and sought
to accompany the two who had fled. Elric left it to the
metal bird to duck and to dive through the criss-cross
of beams and he hurled down another arrow and
another. His clothes and his hair were singed and he
remembered another tune when he had ridden the
bird across the Boiling Sea. Part of the bird's right wing-tip had been melted and its flight was a little
more erratic. But still it climbed and dived and still Elric threw the arrows of quartz into the ranks of the
beings of Pio. Then, suddenly, there were only two left and they were turning to flee, for nearby a cloud
of unpleasant blue smoke had begun to erupt where Theleb K'aarna had been. Elric flung the last arrows
after the reptiles of Pio and took each rider in the back. Now there were only corpses upon the sand.
The blue smoke cleared and Theleb K'aarna's horse stood there. And there was another corpse re-vealed.
It was that of Myshella, Empress of the Dawn, and her throat had been cut. Theleb K'aarna had vanished,
doubtless with the aid of sorcery.
Sickened, Elric descended on the bird of metal. On the walls of Tanelorn the light faded. He dismounted
and he saw that the bird was weeping dark tears from its emerald eyes. He knelt beside Myshella.
An ordinary mortal could not have done it, but now she opened her lips and she spoke, though blood
bubbled from her mouth and her words were hard to make out.
"Elric . . ."
"Can you live?" Elric asked her. "Have you some power to . . ."
"I cannot live. I am slain. Even now I am dead. But it will be some comfort to you to know that Theleb
K'aarna has earned the disdain of the great Chaos Lords. They will never aid him again as they aided him
this tune, for in their eyes he has proved himself incompetent."
"Where has he gone? I will pursue him. I will slay him the next time, that I swear."
"I think that you will. But I do not know where he went. Elric-I am dead and my work is threatened.
I have fought against Chaos for centuries and now, I
think, Chaos will increase its power. Soon the great
battle between the Lords of Law and the Lords of
Entropy will take place. The threads of destiny become
much tangled-the very structure of the uni-verse seems about to transform itself. You have some
part in this . . . some part. . . . Farewell, Elric!"
"Oh, Myshella!"
"Is she dead now?" It was the sombre voice of the bird of metal.
"Aye." The word was forced from Elric's tight throat.
"Then I must take her back to Kaneloon."
Gently Elric picked up Myshella's bloody corpse, supporting the half-severed head on his arm. He placed
the body in the onyx saddle.
The bird said: "We shall not see each other again, Prince Elric, for my death shall follow closely upon
Lady Myshella's."
Elric bowed his head.
The shining wings spread and, with the sound of cymbals clashing, beat at the air.
Elric watched the beautiful creature circle in the sky, and then turn and fly steadily towards the south and
World's Edge.
He buried his face in his hands, but he was beyond weeping now. Was it the fate of all the women he
loved to die? Would Myshella have lived if she had let him die when he had wanted to? There was no
rage left in him, only a sense of impotent despair.
He felt a hand on his shoulder and he turned.
Moonglum stood there, with Rackhir beside him.
They had ridden out from Tanelorn to find him.
"The banners have vanished," Rackhir told him. "And the arrows, too. Only the corpses of those creatures
remain and we shall bury them. Will you come back with us, now, to Tanelorn?"
"Tanelorn cannot give me peace, Rackhir."
"I believe that to be true. But I have a potion in my house which will deaden some of your memories,
help you forget some of what has happened lately."
"I would be grateful for such a potion. Though I doubt ..."
"It will work. I promise. Another would achieve
complete forgetfulness from drinking this potion. But you may hope to forget a little."
Elric thought of Corum and Erekose and Jhary-a-Conel and the implications of his experiences-that even
if he were to die he would be reincarnated in some other form to fight again and to suffer again. An
eternity of warfare and of pain. If he could forget that knowledge it would be enough. He had the
impulse to ride far away from Tanelorn and concern himself as much as he could in the pettier affairs of
men.
"I am so weary of gods and their struggles," he murmured as he mounted his golden mare.
Moonglum stared out into the desert.
"But when will the gods themselves weary of it, I wonder?" he said. "If they did, it would be a happy day
for Man. Perhaps all our struggling, our suffering, our conflicts are merely to relieve the boredom of the
Lords of the Higher Worlds. Perhaps that is why when they created us they made us imperfect."
They began to ride towards Tanelorn while the wind blew sadly across the desert. The sand was already
beginning to cover up the corpses of those who had sought to wage war against eternity and had,
inevitably, found that other eternity which was death.
For a while Elric walked his horse beside the others. His lips formed a name but did not speak it.
And then, suddenly, he was galloping towards Tanelorn dragging the screaming runesword from its
scabbard and brandishing it at the impassive sky, making the horse rear up and lash its hooves in the air,
shouting over and over again in a voice full of roaring misery and bitter rage:
"Ah, damn you! Damn you! Damn you!"
But those who heard him-and some might have been the Gods he addressed-knew that it was Elric of
Melnibone himself who was truly damned.
The Bane of the Black Sword
The fifth volume of the saga of Elric of Melnibone
by Michael Moorcock
BOOK ONE
The Stealer of Souls
In which Elric once again makes the acquaintance of Queen Yishana of Jharkor
and Theleb K'aarna of Pan Tang and receives satisfaction at last.
ONE
In a city called Bakshaan, which was rich enough to make all other cities of the North East seem poor, in
a tall-towered tavern one night, Elric, Lord of the smoking ruins of Melnibone, smiled like a shark and
dryly jested with four powerful merchant princes whom, in a day or so, he intended to pauperize.
Moonglum the Outlander, Elric's companion, viewed the tall albino with admiration and concern. For
Elric to laugh and joke was rare-but that he should share his good humour with men of the merchant
stamp, that was unprecedented. Moonglum congratulated himself that he was Elric's friend and
wondered upon the outcome of the meeting. Elric had, as usual, elaborated little of his plan to
Moonglum.
"We need your particular qualities as swordsman and sorcerer, Lord Elric, and will, of course, pay well
for them." Pilarmo, overdressed, intense and scrawny, was main spokesman for the four.
"And how shall you pay, gentlemen?" inquired Elric politely, still smiling.
Pilarmo's colleagues raised their eyebrows and even their spokesman was slightly taken aback. He
waved his hand through the smoky air of the tavern-room which was occupied only by the six men.
"In gold-in gems," answered Pilarmo.
"In chains," said Elric. "We free travellers need no chains of that sort."
Moonglum bent forward out of the shadows where he sat, his expression showing that he strongly
disapproved of Elric's statement.
Pilarmo and the other merchants were plainly aston-ished, too. "Then how shall we pay you?"
"I will decide that later," Elric smiled. "But why talk of such things until the time-what do you wish me
to do?"
Pilarmo coughed and exchanged glances with his peers. They nodded. Pilarmo dropped his tone and
spoke slowly:
"You are aware that trade is highly competitive in this city, Lord Elric. Many merchants vie with one another
to secure the custom of the people. Bakshaan is a rich city and its populace is comfortably off, in
the main."
"This is well known," Elric agreed; he was privately
likening the well-to-do citizens of Bakshaan to sheep and
himself to the wolf who would rob the fold. Because of
these thoughts, his scarlet eyes were full of a humour
which Moonglum knew to be malevolent and ironic
"There is one merchant in this city who controls more warehouses and shops than any other," Pilarmo
contin-ued. "Because of the size and strength of his caravans, he can afford to import greater quantities
of goods into Bakshaan and thus sell them for lower prices. He is vir-tually a thief-he will ruin us with
his unfair methods." Pilarmo was genuinely hurt and aggrieved.
"You refer to Nikorn of Ilmar?" Moonglum spoke from behind Elric.
Pilarmo nodded mutely.
Elric frowned. "This man heads his own caravans-braves the dangers of the desert, forest and mountain.
He has earned his position."
"That is hardly the point," snapped fat Tormiel, be - ringed and powdered, his flesh a-quiver.
"No, of course not." Smooth-tongued Kelos patted his
colleague's arm consolingly. "But we all admire bravery,
I hope." His friends nodded. Silent Deinstaf, the last of
the four, also coughed and wagged his hairy head. He
put his unhealthy fingers on the jewelled hilt of an ornate
but virtually useless poignard and squared his
shoulders. "But," Kelos went on, glancing at Deinstaf
with approval, "Nikorn takes no risks selling his goods cheaply-he's killing us with his low prices."
"Nikorn is a thorn in our flesh," Pilarmo elaborated unnecessarily.
"And you gentlemen require myself and my compan-ion to remove this thorn," Elric stated.
"In a nutshell, yes." Pilarmo was sweating. He seemed more than a trifle wary of the smiling albino.
Legends referring to Elric and his dreadful, doom-filled exploits were many and elaborately detailed. It
was only because of their desperation that they had sought his help in this matter. They needed one who
could deal in the nigro-mantic arts as well as wield a useful blade. Elric's arrival in Bakshaan was
potential salvation for them.
"We wish to destroy Nikorn's power," Pilarmo contin-ued. "And if this means destroying Nikorn, then-"
He shrugged and half-smiled, watching Elric's face.
"Common assassins are easily employed, particularly in Bakshaan," Elric pointed out softly.
"Uh-true," Pilarmo agreed. "But Nikorn employs a sorcerer-and a private army. The sorcerer protects
him and his palace by means of magic. And a guard of desertmen serve to ensure that if magic fails, then
natural methods can be used for the purpose. Assassins have attempted to eliminate the trader, but
unfortu-nately, they were not lucky."
Elric laughed. "How disappointing, my friends. Still, assassins are the most dispensable members of the
com-munity-are they not? And their souls probably went to placate some demon who would otherwise
have plagued more honest folk."
The merchants laughed half-heartedly and, at this, Moonglum grinned, enjoying himself from his seat in
the shadows.
Elric poured wine for the other five. It was of a vintage
which the law in Bakshaan forbade the populace
from drinking. Too much drove the imbiber mad, yet
Elric had already quaffed great quantities and showed no
ill effects. He raised a cup of the yellow wine to his
lips and drained it, breathing deeply and with satisfaction
as the stuff entered his system. The others sipped
theirs cautiously. The merchants were already regretting their haste in contacting the albino. They had a
feeling that not only were the legends true-but they did not do justice to the strange-eyed man they
wished to employ.
Elric poured more yellow wine into his goblet and his hand trembled slightly and his dry tongue moved
over his lips quickly. His breathing increased as he allowed the beverage to trickle down his throat. He
had taken more than enough to make other men into mewling idi-ots, but those few signs were the only
indication that the wine had any effect upon him at all.
This was a wine for those who wished to dream of dif-ferent and less tangible worlds. Elric drank it in
the hope that he would, for a night or so, cease to dream.
Now he asked: "And who is this mighty sorcerer, Mas-ter Pilarmo?"
"His name is Theleb K'aarna," Pilarmo answered ner-vously.
Elric's scarlet eyes narrowed. "The sorcerer of Pan Tang?"
"Aye-he comes from that island."
Elric put his cup down upon the table and rose, fingering his blade of black iron, the runesword
Stormbringer.
He said with conviction: "I will help you, gentlemen." He had made up his mind not to rob them, after
all. A new and more important plan was forming in his brain.
"Theleb K'aarna," he thought. "So you have made Bakshaan your bolt-hole, eh?"
Theleb K'aarna tittered. It was an obscene sound, coming as it did from the throat of a sorcerer of no
mean skill. It did not fit with his sombre, black-bearded countenance, his tall, scarlet-robed frame. It was
not a sound suited to one of his extreme wisdom.
Theleb K'aarna tittered and stared with dreamy eyes at the woman who lolled on the couch beside him.
He whispered clumsy words of endearment into her ear and she smiled indulgently, stroking his long,
black hair as she would stroke the coat of a dog.
"You're a fool, for all your learning, Theleb K'aarna," she murmured, her hooded eyes staring be-yond
him at the bright green and orange tapestries which decorated the stone walls of her bed-chamber. She
reflected lazily that a woman could not but help take ad-vantage of any man who put himself so into her
power.
"Yishana, you are a bitch," Theleb K'aarna breathed foolishly, "and all the learning in the world cannot
com-bat love. I love you." He spoke simply, directly, not un-derstanding the woman who lay beside him.
He had seen into the black bowels of hell and had returned sane, he knew secrets which would turn any
ordinary man's mind into quivering, jumbled jelly. But in certain arts he was as unversed as his youngest
acolyte. The art of love was one of those. "I love you," he repeated, and wondered why she ignored him.
Yishana, Queen of Jharkor, pushed the sorcerer away from her and rose abruptly, swinging bare, wellformed
legs off the divan. She was a handsome woman, with hair as black as her soul; though her youth
was fading, she had a strange quality about her which both repelled and attracted men. She wore her
multi-coloured silks well and they swirled about her as, with light grace, she strode to the barred window
of the chamber and stared out into the dark and turbulent night. The sorcerer watched her through
narrow, puzzled eyes, disappointed at this halt to their love-making.
"What's wrong?"
The Queen continued to stare out at the night. Great banks of black cloud moved like predatory
monsters, swiftly across the wind-torn sky. The night was raucous and angry about Bakshaan; full of
ominous portent.
Theleb K'aarna repeated his question and again re-ceived no answer. He stood up angrily, then, and
joined her at the window.
"Let us leave now, Yishana, before it is too late. If El-ric learns of our presence in Bakshaan, we shall
both suffer." She did not reply, but her breasts heaved beneath the flimsy fabric and her mouth tightened.
The sorcerer growled, gripping her arm. "Forget your
renegade freebooter, Elric-you have me now, and I can
do much more for you than any sword-swinging medi-cine-man from a broken and senile empire!"
Yishana laughed unpleasantly and turned on her lover. "You are a fool, Theleb K'aarna, and you're much
less of a man than Elric. Three aching years have passed since he deserted me, skulking off into the night
on your trail and leaving me to pine for him! But I still remember his savage kisses and his wild lovemaking.
Gods! I wish he had an equal. Since he left, I've never found one to match him-though many
have tried and proved better than you-until you came skulking back and your spells drove them off or
destroyed them." She sneered, mocking and taunting him. "You've been too long among your
parchments to be much good to me!"
The sorcerer's face muscles tautened beneath his tanned skin and he scowled. "Then why do you let me
remain? I could make you my slave with a potion-you know that!"
"But you wouldn't-and are thus my slave, mighty wizard. When Elric threatened to displace you in my affections,
you conjured that demon and Elric was forced to fight it. He won you'll remember-but in his
pride re-fused to compromise. You fled into hiding and he went in search of you-leaving me! That is
what you did. You're in love, Theleb K'aarna ..." she laughed in his face. "And your love won't let you
use your arts against me-only my other lovers. I put up with you because you are often useful, but if Elric 
were to return ..."
Theleb K'aarna turned away, pettishly picking at his long black beard. Yishana said: "I half hate Elric,
aye! But that is better than half loving you!"
The sorcerer snarled: "Then why did you join me in Bakshaan? Why did you leave your brother's son
upon your throne as regent and come here? I sent word and you came-you must have some affection for
me to do that!"
Yishana laughed again. "I heard that a pale-faced sor-cerer with crimson eyes and a howling runesword
was travelling in the North East. That is why I came, The-leb K'aarna."
Theleb K'aarna's face twisted with anger as he bent
forward and gripped the woman's shoulder in his taloned hand.
"You'll remember that this same pale-faced sorcerer was responsible for your own brother's death," he
spat. "You lay with a man who was a slayer of his kin and yours. He deserted the fleet, which he had led
to pillage his own land, when the Dragon Masters retaliated. Dharmit, your brother, was aboard one of
those ships and he now lies scorched and rotting on the ocean bed."
Yishana shook her head wearily. "You always mention this and hope to shame me. Yes, I entertained
one who was virtually my brothers' murderer-but Elric had ghastlier crimes on his conscience and I still
loved him, in spite or because of them. Your words do not have the effect you require, Theleb K'aarna.
Now leave me, I wish to sleep alone."
The sorcerer's nails were still biting into Yishana's cool flesh. He relaxed his grip. "I am sorry," he said,
his voice breaking. "Let me stay."
"Go," she said softly. And, tortured by his own weakness, Theleb K'aarna, sorcerer of Pan Tang, left.
Elric of Melnibone was in Bakshaan-and Elric had sworn several oaths of vengeance upon Theleb
K'aarna on several separate occasions-in Lormyr, Nadsokor and Taueloru, as well as in Jharkor. In his
heart, the black-bearded sorcerer knew who would win any duel which might take place.
TWO
The four merchants had left swathed in dark cloaks.
They had not deemed it wise for anyone to be aware of
their association with Elric. Now, Elric brooded over a
fresh cup of yellow wine. He knew that he would need
help of a particular and powerful kind, if he were going to capture Nikorn's castle. It was virtually
unstormable and, with Theleb K'aarna's nigromantic protection, a particularly potent sorcery would have
to be used. He knew that he was Theleb K'aarna's match and more when it came to wizardry, but if all
his energy were ex-pended on fighting the other magician, he would have none left to effect an entry past
the crack guard of desert warriors employed by the merchant prince.
He needed help. In the forests which lay to the south of Bakshaan, he knew he would find men whose aid
would be useful. But would they help him? He discussed the problem with Moonglum.
"I have heard that a band of my countrymen have re-cently come north from Vilmir where they have
pillaged several large towns," he informed the Eastlander. "Since the great battle of Imrryr four years
ago, the men of Melnibone have spread outwards from the Dragon Isle, becoming mercenaries and
freebooters. It was because of me that Imrryr fell-and this they know, but if I offer them rich loot, they
might aid me."
Moonglum smiled wryly. "I would not count on it, El-ric," he said. "Such an act as yours can hardly be
forgot-ten, if you'll forgive my frankness. Your countrymen are now unwilling wanderers, citizens of a
razed city-the oldest and greatest the world has known. When Imrryr the Beautiful fell, there must have
been many who wished great suffering upon you."
Elric emitted a short laugh. "Possibly," he agreed, "but these are my people and I know them. We Melniboneans
are an old and sophisticated race-we rarely al-low emotions to interfere with our general wellbeing."
Moonglum raised his eyebrows in an ironic grimace and Elric interpreted the expression rightly. "I was
an exception for a short while," he said. "But now Cymoril and my cousin lie in the ruins of Imrryr and
my own torment will avenge any ill I have done. I think my countrymen will realise this."
Moonglum sighed. "I hope you are right, Elric. Who leads this band?"
"An old friend," Elric answered. "He was Dragon
Master and led the attack upon the reaver ships after they had looted Imrryr. His name is Dyvim Tvar,
once Lord of the Dragon Caves."
"And what of his beasts, where are they?"
"Asleep in the caves again. They can be roused only rarely-they need years to recuperate while their
venom is re-distilled and their energy revitalised. If it were not for this, the Dragon Masters would rule
the world."
"Lucky for you that they don't," Moonglum comment-ed.
Elric said slowly: "Who knows? With me to lead them, they might yet. At least, we could carve a new
em-pire from this world, just as our forefathers did."
Moonglum said nothing. He thought, privately, that the Young Kingdoms would not be so easily
vanquished. Melnibone and her people were ancient, cruel and wise-but even their cruelty was tempered
with the soft disease which comes with age. They lacked the vitality of the barbarian race who had been
the ancestors of the builders of Imrryr and her long-forgotten sister cities. Vitality was often replaced by
tolerance-the tolerance of the aged, the ones who have known past glory but whose day is done.
"In the morning," said Elric, "we will make contact with Dyvim Tvar and hope that what he did to the
reaver fleet, coupled with the conscience-pangs which I have personally suffered, will serve to give him
a properly objective attitude to my scheme.
"And now, sleep, I think," Moonglum said. "I need it, anyway-and the wench who awaits me might be
growing impatient."
Elric shrugged. "As you will. I'll drink a little more wine and seek my bed later."
The black clouds which had huddled over Bakshaan on the previous night, were still there in the
morning. The sun rose behind them, but the inhabitants were unaware of it. It rose unheralded, but in the
fresh, rain-splashed dawn, Elric and Moonglum rode the narrow streets of the city, heading for the south
gate and the forests beyond.
Elric had discarded his usual garb for a simple jerkin of green-dyed leather which bore the insignia of the
royal line of Melnibone: a scarlet dragon, rampant on a gold field. On his finger was the Ring of Kings,
the single rare Actorious stone set in a ring of rune-carved silver. This was the ring that Elric's mighty
forefathers had worn; it was many centuries old. A short cloak hung from his shoulders and his hose was
also blue, tucked into high black riding boots. At his side hung Stormbringer.
A symbiosis existed between man and sword. The man without the sword could become a cripple,
lacking sight and energy-the sword without the man could not drink the blood and the souls it needed for
its existence. They rode together, sword and man, and none could tell which was master.
Moonglum, more conscious of the inclement weather than his friend, hugged a high-collared cloak
around him and cursed the elements occasionally.
It took them an hour's hard riding to reach the out-skirts of the forest. As yet, in Bakshaan, there were
only rumours of the Imrryrian freebooters' coming. Once or twice, a tall stranger had been seen in
obscure taverns near the southern wall, and this had been remarked upon but the citizens of Bakshaan
felt secure in their wealth and power and had reasoned, with a certain truth in their conviction, that
Bakshaan could withstand a raid far more ferocious than those raids which had taken weaker Vilmirian
towns. Elric had no idea why his countrymen had driven northwards to Bakshaan. Possibly they had
come only to rest and turn their loot into food supplies in the bazaars.
The smoke of several large campfires told Elric and Moonglum where the Melniboneans, were
entrenched. With a slackening of pace, they guided their horses in that direction while wet branches
brushed their faces and the scents of the forest, released by the life-bringing rain, impinged sweetly upon 
their nostrils. It was with a feeling akin to relaxation that Elric met the outguard who suddenly appeared
from the undergrowth to bar their way along the forest trail.
The Imrryrian guard was swathed in furs and steel. Beneath the visor of an intricately worked helmet he
peered at Elric with wary eyes. His vision was slightly impaired by the visor and the rain which dripped
from it so that he did not immediately recognise Elric.
"Halt. What do you in these parts?"
Elric said impatiently, "Let me pass-it is Elric, your lord and your Emperor."
The guard gasped and lowered the long-bladed spear he carried. He pushed back his helmet and gazed at
the man before him with a myriad of different emotions passing across his face. Among these were
amazement, reverence and hate.
He bowed stiffly. "This is no place for you, my liege. You renounced and betrayed your people five
years ago and while I acknowledge the blood of kings which flows in your veins, I cannot obey you or
do you the homage which it would otherwise be your right to expect."
"Of course," said Elric proudly, sitting his horse straight-backed. "But let your leader-my boyhood friend
Dyvim Tvar-be the judge of how to deal with me. Take me to him at once and remember that my
companion has done you no ill, but treat him with re-spect as befits the chosen friend of an Emperor of
Melni-bone."
The guard bowed again and took hold of the reins of Elric's mount. He led the pair down the trail and
into a large clearing wherein were pitched the tents of the men of Imrryr. Cooking fires flared in the
centre of the great circle of pavilions and the fine-featured warriors of Melnibone sat talking softly
around them. Even in the light of the gloomy day, the fabrics of the tents were bright and gay. The soft
tones were wholly Melnibonean in texture. Deep, smoky greens, azure, ochre, gold, dark blue. The
colours did not clash-they blended. Elric felt sad nostalgia for the sundered, multi-coloured towers of
Imrryr the Beautiful.
As the two companions and their guide drew nearer, men looked up in astonishment and a low muttering
re-placed the sounds of ordinary conversation.
"Please remain here," the guard said to Elric. "I will
inform Lord Dyvim Tvar of your coming." Elric nodded his acquiescence and sat firmly in his saddle
conscious of the gaze of the gathered warriors. None approached him and some, whom Elric had known
personally in the old days, were openly embarrassed. They were the ones who did not stare but rather
averted their eyes, tending to the cooking fires or taking a sudden interest in the pol-ish of their finelywrought
longswords and dirks. A few growled angrily, but they were in a definite minority. Most of the
men were simply shocked-and also inquisi-tive. Why had this man, their king and their betrayer, come to
their camp?
The largest pavilion, of gold and scarlet, had at its peak a banner upon which was emblazoned a dormant
dragon, blue upon white. This was the tent of Dyvim Tvar and from it the Dragon Master hurried,
buckling on his sword-belt, his intelligent eyes puzzled and wary.
Dyvim Tvar was a man a little older than Elric and he bore the stamp of Melnibonean nobility. His
mother had been a princess, a cousin to Elric's own mother. His cheek-bones were high and delicate, his
eyes slightly slanting while his skull was narrow, tapering at the jaw. Like Elric, his ears were thin, near
lobeless and coming almost to a point. His hands, the left one now folded around the hilt of his sword,
were long-fingered and, like the rest of his skin, pale, though not nearly so pale as the dead white of the
albino's. He strode towards the mounted Emperor of Melnibone and now his emotions were controlled.
When he was five feet away from Elric, Dyvim Tvar bowed slowly, his head bent and his face hidden.
When he looked up again, his eyes met those of Elric and remained fixed.
"Dyvim Tvar, Lord of the Dragon Caves, greets Elric, Master of Melnibone, Exponent of her Secret
Arts." The Dragon Master spoke gravely the age-old ritual greeting.
Elric was not as confident as he seemed as he replied:
"Elric, Master of Melnibone, greets his loyal subject and
demands that he give audience to Dyvim Tvar." It was
not fitting, by ancient Melnibonean standards, that the
king should request an audience with one of his subjects and the Dragon Master understood this. He now
said:
"I would be honoured if my liege would allow me to accompany him to my pavilion."
Elric dismounted and led the way towards Dyvim Tvar's pavilion. Moonglum also dismounted and made
to follow, but Elric waved him back. The two Imrryrian noblemen entered the tent.
Inside, a small oil-lamp augmented the gloomy day-light which filtered through the colourful fabric. The
tent was simply furnished, possessing only a soldier's hard bed, a table and several carved wooden stools.
Dyvim Tvar bowed and silently indicated one of these stools. Elric sat down.
For several moments, the two men said nothing. Nei-ther allowed emotion to register on their controlled
fea-tures. They simply sat and stared at one another. Even-tually Elric said:
"You know me for a betrayer, a thief, a murderer of my own kin and a slayer of my countrymen, Dragon
Master."
Dyvim Tvar nodded. "With my liege's permission, I will agree with him."
"We were never so formal in the old days, when alone," Elric said. "Let us forget ritual and traditionMelnibone
is broken and her sons are wanderers. We meet, as we used to, as equals-only, now, this is
wholly true. We are equals. The Ruby Throne crashed in the ashes of Imrryr and now no emperor may
sit in state.
Dyvim Tvar sighed. "This is true, Elric-but why have you come here? We were content to forget you.
Even while thoughts of vengeance were fresh, we made no move to seek you out. Have you come to
mock?"
"You know I would never do that, Dyvim Tvar.
I rarely sleep, in these days, and when I do I have such
dreams that I would rather be awake. You know that
Yyrkoon forced me to do what I did when he usurped
the throne for the second time, after I had trusted him
as Regent, when, again for the second time, he put his
sister, whom I loved, into a sorcerous slumber. To aid
that reaver fleet was my only hope of forcing him to
undo his work and release Cymoril from the spell. I was moved by vengeance but it was Stormbringer,
my sword, which slew Cymoril, not I."
"Of this, I am aware." Dyvim Tvar sighed again and rubbed one jewelled hand across his face. "But it
does not explain why you came here. There should be no contact between you and your people. We are
wary of you Elric. Even if we allowed you to lead us again you would take your own doomed path and
us with you. There is no future there for myself and my men."
"Agreed. But I need your help for this one time-then our ways can part again."
"We should kill you, Elric. But which would be the greater crime? Failure to do justice and slay our betrayer-or
regicide? You have given me a problem at a time when there are too many problems already.
Should I attempt to solve it?"
"I but played a part in history," Elric said earnestly. "Time would have done what I did, eventually. I but
brought the day nearer-and brought it when you and our people were still resilient enough to combat it
and turn to a new way of life."
Dyvim Tvar smiled ironically. "That is one point of view, Elric-and it has truth in it, I grant you. But tell
it to the men who lost their kin and their homes because of you. Tell it to warriors who had to tend
maimed com-rades, to brothers, fathers and husbands whose wives, daughters and sisters-proud
Melnibonean women-were used to pleasure the barbarian pillagers."
"Aye," Elric dropped his eyes. When he next spoke it was quietly. "I can do nothing to replace what our
people have lost-would that I could. I yearn for Imrryr often, and her women, and her wines and 
entertain-ments. But I can offer plunder. I can offer you the richest palace in Bakshaan. Forget the old
wounds and follow me this once."
"Do you seek the riches of Bakshaan, Elric? You were never one for jewels and precious metal! Why,
Elric?"
Elric ran his hands through his white hair. His red
eyes were troubled. "For vengeance, once again, Dyvim
Tvar. I owe a debt to a sorcerer from Pan Tang-Theleb
K'aarna. You may have heard of him-he is fairly powerful for one of a comparatively young race."
"Then we're joined in this, Elric," Dyvim Tvar spoke grimly. "You are not the only Melnibonean who
owes Theleb K'aarna a debt! Because of that bitch-queen Yishana of Jharkor, one of our men was done
to death a year ago in a most foul and horrible manner. Killed by Theleb K'aarna because he gave his
embraces to Yishana who sought a substitute for you. We can unite to avenge that blood, King Elric, and
it will be a fitting excuse for those who would rather have your blood on their knives."
Elric was not glad. He had a sudden premonition that this fortunate coincidence was to have grave and
unpre-dictable outcomings. But he smiled.
THREE
In a smoking pit, somewhere beyond the limitations of space and time, a creature stirred. All around it,
shadows moved. They were the shadows of the souls of men and these shadows which moved through
the bright darkness were the masters of the creature. It allowed them to master it-so long as they paid its
price. In the speech of men, this creature had a name. It was called Quaolnargn and would answer to this
name if called. Now it stirred. It heard its name carrying over the barriers which normally blocked its
way to the Earth.
The calling of the name effected a temporary pathway
through those intangible barriers. It stirred again, as its
name was called for the second time. It was unaware of
why it was called or to what it was called. It was only
muzzily conscious of one fact. When the pathway was
opened to it, it could feed. It did not eat flesh and it did
not drink blood. It fed on the minds and the souls of adult men and women. Occasionally, as an
appetizer, it enjoyed the morsels, the sweetmeats as it were, of the in-nocent life-force which it sucked
from children. It ig-nored animals since there was not enough awareness in an animal to savour. The
creature was, for all its alien stupidity, a gourmet and a connoisseur.
Now its name was called for the third time. It stirred again and flowed forward. The time was
approaching when it could, once again, feed...
Theleb K'aarna shuddered. He was, basically, he felt, a man of peace. It was not his fault that his
avaricious love for Yishana had turned him mad. It was not his fault that, because of her, he now
controlled several powerful and malevolent demons who, in return for the slaves and enemies he fed
them, protected the palace of Nikorn the merchant. He felt, very strongly, that none of it was his fault. It
was circumstance which had damned him. He wished sadly that he had never met Yishana, never
returned to her after that unfortunate episode outside the walls of Tanelorn. He shuddered again as he
stood within the pentacle and summoned Quaolnargn. His embryonic talent for precognition had shown
him a little of the near-future and he knew that Elric was preparing to do battle with him. Theleb K'aarna
was taking the opportunity of summoning all the aid he could control. Quaolnargn must be sent to
destroy Elric, if it could, before the albino reached the castle. Theleb K'aarna congratulated himself that
he still retained the lock of white hair which had enabled him, in the past, to send another, now deceased,
demon against Elric.Quaolnargn knew that it was reaching its master. It propelled itself sluggishly
forward and felt a stinging
pain as it entered the alien continuum. It knew that its master's soul hovered before it but, for some 
reason, was disappointingly unattainable. Something was dropped in front of it. Quaolnargn scented at it
and knew what it must do. This was part of its new feed. It flowed gratefully away, intent on finding its
prey before the pain which was endemic of a prolonged stay in the strange place grew too much.
Elric rode at the head of his countrymen. On his right was Dyvim Tvar, the Dragon Master, on his left,
Moon-glum of Elwher. Behind him rode two hundred fighting men and behind them the wagons
containing their loot, their war-machines and their slaves.
The caravan was resplendent with proud banners and the gleaming, long-bladed lances of Imrryr. They
were clad in steel, with tapering greaves, helmets and shoul-der-pieces. Their breastplates were polished
and glinted where their long fur jerkins were open. Over the jerkins were flung bright cloaks of Imrryrian
fabrics, scintillat-ing in the watery sunshine. The archers were immedi-ately close to Elric and his
companions. They carried unstrung bone bows of tremendous power, which only they could use. On
their backs were quivers crammed with black-fletched arrows. Then came the lancers, with their shining
lances at a tilt to avoid the low branches of the trees. Behind these rode the main strength-the Imrryrian
swordsmen carrying longswords and shorter stabbing weapons which were too short to be real swords
and too long to be named as knives. They rode, skirting Bakshaan, for the palace of Nikorn which lay to
the north of Bakshaan. They rode, these men, in silence. They could think of nothing to say while Elric,
their liege, led them to battle for the first time in five years.
Stormbringer, the black hellblade, tingled under El-ric's hand, anticipating a new sword-quenching.
Moon-glum fidgeted in his saddle, nervous of the forthcoming fight which he knew would involve dark
sorcery. Moon-glum had no liking for the sorcerous arts or for the crea-tures they spawned. To his mind,
men should fight their own battles without help. They rode on, nervous and tense.
Stormbringer shook against Elric's side. A faint moan emanated from the metal and the tone was one of
warn-ing. Elric raised a hand and the cavalcade reined to a halt.
"There is something coming near which only I can
deal with," he informed the men. "I will ride on ahead."
He spurred his horse into a wary canter, keeping his eyes before him. Stormbringer's voice was louder,
sharp-er-a muted shriek. The horse trembled and Elric's own nerves were tense. He had not expected
trouble so soon and he prayed that whatever evil was lurking in the forest was not directed against him.
"Arioch, be with me," he breathed. "Aid me now, and I'll dedicate a score of warriors to you. Aid me,
Arioch."
A foul odour forced itself into Elric's nostrils. He coughed and covered his mouth with his hands, his
eyes seeking the source of the stink. The horse whinnied. El-ric jumped from the saddle and slapped his
mount on the rump, sending it back along the trail. He crouched warily, Stormbringer now in his grasp,
the black metal quivering from point to pommel.
He sensed it with the witch-sight of his forefathers be-fore he saw it with his eyes. And he recognised its
shape. He, himself, was one of its masters. But this time he had no control over Quaolnargn-he was
standing in no pen-tacle and his only protection was his blade and his wits. He knew, also, of the power
of Quaolnargn and shud-dered. Could he overcome such a horror single-handedly?
"Arioch! Arioch! Aid me!" It was a scream, high and desperate.
"Arioch!"
There was no time to conjure a spell. Quaolnargn was before him, a great green toad-thing which hopped
along the trail obscenely, moaning to itself in its Earth-fostered pain. It towered over Elric so that the
albino was in its shadow before it was ten feet away from him. Elric breathed quickly and screamed
once more: "Ari-och! Blood and souls, if you aid me, now!"
Suddenly, the toad-demon leapt.
Elric sprang to one side, but was caught by a long-nailed foot which sent him flying into the
undergrowth. Quaolnargn turned clumsily and its filthy mouth opened hungrily, displaying a deep
toothless cavity from which a foul odour poured.
"Arioch!"
In its evil and alien insensitivity, the toad-thing did not even recognize the name of so powerful a demongod.
It could not be frightened-it had to be fought.
And as it approached Elric for the second time, the clouds belched rain from their bowels and a
downpour lashed the forest.
Half-blinded by the rain smashing against his face, El-ric backed behind a tree, his runesword ready. In
ordi-nary terms, Quaolnargn was blind. It could not see El-ric or the forest. It could not feel the rain. It
could only see and smell men's souls-its feed. The toad-demon blundered past him and, as it did so, Elric
leapt high, holding his blade with both hands, and plunged it to the hilt into the demon's soft and
quivering back. Flesh-or whatever Earth-bound stuff formed the demon's body-squelched nauseatingly.
Elric pulled at Stormbringer's hilt as the sorcerous sword seared into the hellbeast's back, cutting down
where the spine should be but where no spine was. Quaolnargn piped its pain. Its voice was thin and
reedy, even in such extreme agony. It retaliated.
Elric felt his mind go numb and then his head was filled with a pain which was not natural in any sense.
He could not even shriek. His eyes widened in horror as he realised what was happening to him. His soul
was being drawn from his body. He knew it. He felt no physical weakness, he was only aware of looking
out into...
But even that awareness was fading. Everything was fading, even the pain, even the dreadful hellspawned
pain.
"Arioch!" he croaked.
Savagely, he summoned strength from somewhere. Not from himself, not even from Stormbringer-from
somewhere. Something was aiding him at last, giving him strength-enough strength to do what he must.
He wrenched the blade from the demon's back. He
stood over Quaolnargn. Above him. He was floating
somewhere, not in the air of Earth. Just floating over
the demon. With thoughtful deliberation he selected a
spot on the demon's skull which he somehow knew to be
the only spot on his body where Stormbringer might slay. Slowly and carefully, he lowered Stormbringer
and twisted the runesword through Quaolnargn's skull. The toad-thing whimpered, dropped-and
vanished. Elric lay sprawled in the undergrowth, trembling the length of his aching body. He picked
himself up slow-ly. All his energy had been drained from him. Stormbringer, too, seemed to
have lost its vitality, but that, Elric knew would return and, in returning, bring him new strength.
But then he felt his whole frame tugged rigid. He was astounded. What was happening? His senses
began to blank out. He had the feeling that he was staring down a long, black tunnel which stretched into
nowhere. Ev-erything was vague. He was aware of motion. He was travelling. How-or where, he could
not tell.
For brief seconds he travelled, conscious only of an unearthly feeling of motion and the fact that Stormbringer,
his life, was clutched in his right hand.
Then he felt hard stone beneath him and he opened his eyes-or was it, he wondered, that his vision returned?-and
looked up at the gloating face above him.
"Theleb K'aarna," he whispered hoarsely, "how did you effect this?"
The sorcerer bent down and tugged Stormbringer from Elric's enfeebled grasp. He sneered. "I followed
your commendable battle with my messenger, Lord El-ric. When it was obvious that somehow you had
sum-moned aid-I quickly conjured another spell and brought you here. Now I have your sword and your
strength. I know that without it you are nothing. You are in my power, Elric of Melnibone."
Elric gasped air into his lungs. His whole body was pain-racked. He tried to smile, but he could not. It
was not in his nature to smile when he was beaten. "Give me back my sword."
Theleb K'aarna gave a self-satisfied smirk. He chuck-led. "Who talks of vengeance, now, Elric?"
"Give me my sword!" Elric tried to rise but he was too weak. His vision blurred until he could hardly see
the gloating sorcerer.
"And what kind of bargain do you offer?"Theleb K'aarna asked. "You are not a well man, Lord Elric-and
sick men do not bargain. They beg."
Elric trembled in impotent anger. He tightened his mouth. He would not beg-neither would he bargain.
In silence, he glowered at the sorcerer.
"I think that first," Theleb K'aarna said smiling. "I shall lock this away." He hefted Stormbringer in his
hand and turned towards a cupboard behind him. From his robes he produced a key with which he
unlocked the cupboard and placed the runesword inside, carefully locking the door again when he had
done so. "Then, I think, I'll show our virile hero to his ex-mistress-the sis-ter of the man he betrayed four
years ago."
Elric said nothing.
"After that," Theleb K'aarna continued, "my em-ployer Nikorn shall be shown the assassin who thought
he could do what others failed to achieve." He smiled. "What a day," he chuckled. "What a day! So full.
So rich with pleasure."
Theleb K'aarna tittered and picked up a hand-bell. He rang it. A door behind Elric opened and two tall
desert warriors strode in. They glanced at Elric and then at Theleb K'aarna. They were evidently amazed.
"No questions," Theleb K'aarna snapped. "Take this refuse to the chambers of Queen Yishana."
Elric fumed as he was hefted up between the two. The men were dark-skinned, bearded and their eyes
were deep-set beneath shaggy brows. They wore the heavy wool-trimmed metal caps of their race, and
their armour was not of iron but of thick, leather-covered wood. Down a long corridor they lugged Elric's
weak-ened body and one of them rapped sharply on a door.
Elric recognised Yishana's voice bid them enter. Be-hind the desert-men and their burden came the tittering,
fussing sorcerer. "A present for you, Yishana," he called.
The desert men entered. Elric could not see Yishana
but he heard her gasp. "On the couch," directed the sorcerer.
Elric was deposited on yielding fabric. He lay
completely exhausted on the couch, staring up at a
bright, lewd mural which had been painted on the ceil-ing.
Yishana bent over him. Elric could smell her erotic perfume. He said hoarsely: "An unprecedented
reunion, Queen." Yishana's eyes were, for a moment, concerned, then they hardened and she laughed
cynically.
"Oh-my hero has returned to me at last. But I'd rather he'd come at his own volition, not dragged here by
the back of his neck like a puppy. The wolf's teeth have all been drawn and there's no one to savage me
at nights." She turned away, disgust on her painted face. "Take him away, Theleb K'aarna. You have
proved your point."
The sorcerer nodded.
"And now," he said, "to visit Nikorn-I think he should be expecting us by this time ..."
FOUR
Nikorn of Ilmar was not a young man. He was well past fifty but had preserved his youth. His face was
that of a peasant, firm-boned but not fleshy. His eyes were keen and hard as he stared at Elric who had
been mockingly propped in a chair.
"So you are Elric of Melnibone the Wolf of the Snarl-ing Sea, spoiler, reaver and woman-slayer. I think
that you could hardly slay a child now. However, I will say that it discomforts me to see any man in such
a posi-tion-particularly one who has been so active as you. Is it true what the spell-maker says? Were
you sent here by my enemies to assassinate me?"
Elric was concerned for his men. What would they do? Wait-or go on. If they stormed the palace now
they were doomed-and so was he.
"Is it true?" Nikorn was insistent.
"No," whispered Elric. "My quarrel was with Theleb K'aarna. I have an old score to settle with him."
"I am not interested in old scores, my friend," Nikorn said, not unkindly. "I am interested in preserving
my life. Who sent you here?"
"Theleb K'aarna speaks falsely if he told you I was sent," Elric lied. "I was interested only in paying my
debt."
"It is not only the sorcerer who told me, I'm afraid," Nikorn said. "I have many spies in the city and two
of them independently informed me of a plot by local mer-chants to employ you to kill me."
Elric smiled faintly. "Very well," he agreed. "It was true, but I had no intention of doing what they
asked."
Nikorn said: "I might believe you, Elric of Melni-bone. But now I do not know what to do with you. I
would not turn anyone over to Theleb K'aarna's mer-cies. May I have your word that you will not make
an attempt on my life again?"
"Are we bargaining, Master Nikorn?" Elric said faintly.
"We are."
"Then what do I give my word in return for, sir?"
"Your life and freedom, Lord Elric."
"And my sword?"
Nikorn shrugged regretfully. "I'm sorry-not your sword."
"Then take my life," said Elric brokenly.
"Come now-my bargain's good. Have your life and freedom and give your word that you will not plague
me again."
Elric breathed deeply. "Very well."
Nikorn moved away. Theleb K'aarna who had been standing in the shadows put a hand on the merchant's
arm. "You're going to release him?"
"Aye," Nikorn said. "He's no threat to either of us now."
Elric was aware of a certain feeling of friendship in
Nikorn's attitude towards him. He, too, felt something
of the same. Here was a man both courageous and
clever. But-Elric fought madness-without Storm-bringer, what could he do to fight back?
The two hundred Imrryrian warriors lay hidden in the undergrowth as dusk gave way to night. They
watched and wondered. What had happened to Elric? Was he now in the castle as Dyvim Tvar thought?
The Dragon Master knew something of the art of divining, as did all members of the royal line of
Melnibone. From what small spells he had conjured, it seemed that Elric now lay within the castle walls.
But without Elric to battle Theleb K'aarna's power, how could they take it?
Nikorn's palace was also a fortress, bleak and un-lovely. It was surrounded by a deep moat of dark, stagnant
water. It stood high above the surrounding forest, built into rather than on to the rock. Much of it
had been carved out of the living stone. It was sprawling and rambling and covered a large area,
surrounded by natural buttresses. The rock was porous in places, and slimy water ran down the walls of
the lower parts, spreading through dark moss. It was not a pleasant place, judging from the outside, but it
was almost cer-tainly impregnable. Two hundred men could not take it, without the aid of magic.
Some of the Melnibonean warriors were becoming im-patient. There were a few who muttered that Elric
had, once again, betrayed them. Dyvim Tvar and Moonglum did not believe this. They had seen the
signs of con-flict-and heard them-in the forest.
They waited: Hoping for a signal from the castle it-self.
They watched the castle's great main gate-and their patience at last proved of value. The huge wood and
metal gate swung inwards on chains and a white-faced man in the tattered regalia of Melnibone appeared
be-tween two desert warriors. They were supporting him, it seemed. They pushed him forward-he
staggered a few yards along the causeway of slimy stone which bridged the moat.
Then he fell. He began to crawl wearily, painfully, forward.
Moonglum growled. "What have they done to him? I must help him." But Dyvim Tvar held him back.
"No-it would not do to betray our presence here. Let him reach the forest first, then we can help him."
Even those who had cursed Elric, now felt pity for the albino as, staggering and crawling alternately, he
dragged his body slowly towards them. From the battle-ments of the fortress a tittering laugh was borne
down to the ears of those below. They also caught a few words.
"What now, wolf?" said the voice. "What now?"
Moonglum clenched his hands and trembled with rage, hating to see his proud friend so mocked in his
weakness. "What's happened to him? What have they done?"
"Patience," Dyvim Tvar said. "We'll find out in a short while."
It was an agony to wait until Elric finally crawled on his knees into the undergrowth.
Moonglum went forward to aid his friend. He put a Supporting arm around Elric's shoulders but the
albino snarled and shook it off, his whole countenance aflame with terrible hate-made more terrible
because it was impotent. Elric could do nothing to destroy that which he hated. Nothing.
Dyvim Tvar said urgently: "Elric, you must tell us What happened. If we're to help you-we must know
what happened."
Elric breathed heavily and nodded his agreement. His face partially cleared of the emotion he felt and
weakly he stuttered out the story.
"So," Moonglum growled, "our plans come to noth-ing-and you have lost your strength for ever."
Elric shook his head. "There must be a way," he gasped. "There must!"
"What? How? If you have a plan, Elric-let me hear it
now,"
Elric swallowed thickly and mumbled. "Very well,
Moonglum, you shall hear it. But listen carefully, for I have not the strength to repeat it."
Moonglum was a lover of the night, but only when it was lit by the torches found in cities. He did not
like the night when it came to open countryside and he was not fond of it when it surrounded a castle
such as Nikorn's, but he pressed on and hoped for the best.
If Elric had been right in his interpretation, then the battle might yet be won and Nikorn's palace taken.
But it still meant danger for Moonglum and he was not one deliberately to put himself into danger.
As he viewed the stagnant waters of the moat with dis-taste he reflected that this was enough to test any
friend-ship to the utmost. Philosophically, he lowered himself down into the water and began to swim
across it.
The moss on the fortress offered a flimsy handhold, but it led to ivy which gave a better grip. Moonglum
slowly clambered up the wall. He hoped that Elric had been right and that Theleb K'aarna would need to
rest for a while before he could work more sorcery. That was why Elric had suggested he make haste.
Moonglum clambered on, and eventually reached the small un-barred window he sought. A normal size
man could not have entered, but Moonglum's small frame was proving useful.
He wriggled through the gap, shivering with cold, and landed on the hard stone of a narrow staircase
which ran both up and down the interior wall of the fortress. Moonglum frowned, and then took the
steps leading up-wards. Elric had given him a rough idea of how to reach his destination.
Expecting the worst, he went soft-footed up the stone steps. He went towards the chambers of Yishana,
Queen of Jharkor.
In an hour, Moonglum was back, shivering with cold and dripping with water. In his hands he carried
Stormbringer. He carried the runesword with cautious care-nervous of its sentient evil. It was alive
again; alive with black, pulsating life.
"Thank the gods I was right," Elric murmured weakly from where he lay surrounded by two or three
Imrryri-ans, including Dyvim Tvar who was staring at the al-bino with concern. "I prayed that I was
correct in my assumption and Theleb K'aarna was resting after his earlier exertions on my behalf..."
He stirred, and Dyvim Tvar helped him to sit up-right. Elric reached out a long white hand-reached like
an addict of some terrible drug towards the sword. "Did you give her my message?" he asked as he
gratefully seized the pommel.
"Aye," Moonglum said shakily, "and she agreed. You were also right in your other interpretation, Elric.
It did not take her long to inveigle the key out of a weary Theleb K'aarna. The sorcerer was
tremendously tired and Nikorn was becoming nervous wondering if an at-tack of any kind would take
place while Theleb K'aarna was incapable of action. She went herself to the cup-board and got me the
blade."
"Women can sometimes be useful," said Dyvim Tvar dryly. "Though usually, in matters like these,
they're a hindrance." It was possible to see that something other than immediate problems of taking the
castle were worrying Dyvim Tvar, but no one thought to ask him what it was that bothered him. It
seemed a personal thing.
"I agree, Dragon Master," Elric said, almost gaily. The gathered men were aware of the strength which
poured swiftly back into the albino's deficient veins, im-buing him with a new hellborn vitality. "It is
time for our vengeance. But remember-no harm to Nikorn. I gave him my word."
He folded his right hand firmly around Stormbringer's hilt. "Now for a sword-quenching. I believe I can
obtain the help of just the allies we need to keep the sorcerer occupied while we storm the castle. I'll
need no pentacle to summon my friends of the air!"
Moonglum licked his long lips. "So it's sorcery again. In truth, Elric, this whole country is beginning to
stink of wizardry and the minions of Hell."
Elric murmured for his friend's ears: "No Hell-beings
these-but honest elementals, equally powerful in many ways. Curb your belly-fear, Moonglum-a little
more simple conjuring and Theleb K'aarna will have no desire to retaliate."
The albino frowned, remembering the secret pacts of his forefathers. He took a deep breath and closed
his pain-filled scarlet eyes. He swayed, the runesword half-loose in his grip. His chant was low, like the
far-off moaning of the wind itself. His chest moved quickly up and down, and some of the younger
warriors, those who had never been fully initiated into the ancient lore of Melnibone", stirred with
discomfort. Elric's voice was not addressing human folk-his words were for the invisible, the intangiblethe
supernatural. An old and ancient rhyme began the casting of word-runes ...
"Hear the doomed one's dark decision,
Let the Wind Giant's wail be heard,
Graoll and Misha's mighty moaning
Send my enemy like a bird.
"By the sultry scarlet stones,
By the bane of my black blade,
By the Lasshaar's lonely mewling,
Let a mighty wind be made.
"Speed of sunbeams from their homeland,
Swifter than the sundering storm,
Speed of arrow deerwards shooting,
Let the sorcerer so be borne."
His voice broke and he called high and clear:
"Misha! Misha! In the name of my fathers I summon thee, Lord of the Winds!"
Almost at once, the trees of the forest suddenly bent as if some great hand had brushed them aside. A
terri-ble soughing voice swam from nowhere. And all but El-ric, deep in his trance, shivered.
"ELRIC OF MELNIBONE," the voice roared like a distant
storm, 'WE KNEW YOUR FATHERS, I KNOW THEE. THE DEBT
WE OWE THE LINE OF ELRIC IS FORGOTTEN BY MORTALS BUT
GRAOLL AND MISHA, KINGS OF THE WIND, REMEMBER. HOW MAY THE LASSAHAR AID 
THEE?"
The voice seemed almost friendly-but proud and aloof and awe-inspiring.
Elric, completely in a state of trance now, jerked his whole body in convulsions. His voice shrieked
piercingly from his throat-and the words were alien, unhuman, vi-olently disturbing to the ears and
nerves of the human listeners. Elric spoke briefly and then the invisible Wind Giant's great voice roared
and sighed:
"I WILL DO AS YOU DESIRE." Then the trees bent once more and the forest was still and muted.
Somewhere in the gathered ranks, a man sneezed sharp-ly and this was a sign for others to start talkingspecu-lating.
For many moments, Elric remained in his trance and then, quite suddenly, he opened his enigmatic eyes
and looked gravely around him, puzzled for a second. Then he clasped Stormbringer more firmly and
leaned for-ward, speaking to the men of Imrryr. "Soon Theleb K'aarna will be in our power, my friends,
and so also will we possess the loot of Nikorn's palace!"
But Dyvim Tvar shuddered then. "I'm not so given skilled in the esoteric arts as you, Elric," he said
quietly. "But in my soul I see three wolves leading a pack to slaughter and one of those wolves must die.
My doom is near me, I think."
Elric said uncomfortably: "Worry not, Dragon Master. You'll live to mock the ravens and spend the
spoils of Bakshaan." But his voice was not convincing.
FIVE
In his bed of silk and ermine, Theleb K'aarna stirred and awoke. He had a brooding inkling of coming
trou-ble and he remembered that earlier in his tiredness he had given more to Yishana than had been
wise. He could not remember what it was and now he had a presentiment of danger-the closeness of
which over-shadowed thoughts of any past indiscretion. He arose hurriedly and pulled his robe over his
head, shrugging into it as he walked towards a strangely-silvered mirror which was set on one wall of his
chamber and reflected no image.
With bleary eyes and trembling hands he began preparations. From one of the many earthenware jars
resting on a bench near the window, he poured a sub-stance which seemed like dried blood mottled with
the hardened blue venom of the black serpent whose home-land was in far Dorel which lay on the edge
of the world. Over this, he muttered a swift incantation, scooped the stuff into a crucible and hurled it at
the mirror, one arm shielding his eyes. A crack sounded, hard and sharp to his ears, and bright green
light erupt-ed suddenly and was gone. The mirror flickered deep within itself, the silvering seemed to
undulate and flicker and flash and then a picture began to form.
Theleb K'aarna knew that the sight he witnessed had taken place in the recent past. It showed him Elric's
summoning of the Wind Giants.
Theleb K'aarna's dark features grinned with a terrible
fear. His hands jerked as spasms shook him. Half-gibbering,
he rushed back to his bench and, leaning his hands
upon it, stared out of the window into the deep night.
He knew what to expect.
A great and dreadful storm was blowing-and he was the object of the Lasshaar's attack. He had to
retaliate, else his own soul would be wrenched from him by the Giants of the Wind and flung to the air
spirits, to be borne for eternity on the winds of the world. Then his voice would moan like a banshee
around the cold peaks of high ice-clothed mountains for ever-lost and lonely. His soul would be damned
to travel with the four winds wherever their caprice might bear it, knowing no rest.
Theleb K'aarna had a respect born of fear for the powers of the aeromancer, the rare wizard who could
control the wind elementals-and aeromancy was only one of the arts which Elric and his ancestors
possessed. Then Theleb K'aarna realised what he was battling-ten thousand years and hundreds of
generations of sorcerers who had gleaned knowledge from the Earth and beyond it and passed it down to 
the albino whom he, Theleb K'aarna, had sought to destroy. Then Theleb K'aarna fully regretted his
actions. Then-it was too late.
The sorcerer had no control over the powerful Wind Giants as Elric had. His only hope was to combat
one ele-ment with another. The fire-spirits must be summoned, and quickly. All of Theleb K'aarna's
pyromantic powers would be required to hold off the ravening supernatural winds which were soon to
shake the air and the earth. Even Hell would shake to the sound and the thunder of the Wind Giants'
wrath.
Quickly, Theleb K'aarna marshalled his thoughts and, with trembling hands, began to make strange
passes in the air and promise unhealthy pacts with whichever of the powerful fire elementals would help
him this once. He promised himself to eternal death for the sake of a few more years of life.
With the gathering of the Wind Giants came the
thunder and the rain. The lightning flashed sporadically,
but not lethally. It never touched the earth. Elric,
Moonglum, and the men of Imrryr were aware of disturbing
movements in the atmosphere, but only Elric
with his witch sight could see a little of what was hap-pening. The Lasshaar Giants were invisible to
other eyes.
The war engines which the Imrryrians were even now constructing from pre-fashioned parts were puny
things compared to the Wind Giants' might. But victory depended upon these engines since the
Lasshaar's fight would be with the supernatural not the natural.
Battle-rams and siege ladders were slowly taking shape as the warriors worked with frantic speed. The
hour of the storming came closer as the wind rose and thunder rattled. The moon was blanked out by
huge billowings of black cloud, and the men worked by the light of torches. Surprise was no great asset
in an attack of the kind planned.
Two hours before dawn, they were ready.
At last the men of Imrryr, Elric, Dyvim Tvar and Moonglum riding high at their head, moved towards
the castle of Nikorn. As they did so, Elric raised his voice in an unholy shout-and thunder rumbled in
answer to him. A great gout of lightning seared out of the sky towards the palace and the whole place
shook and trembled as a ball of mauve and orange fire suddenly appeared over the castle and absorbed
the lightning! The battle between fire and air had begun.
The surrounding countryside was alive with a weird and malignant shrieking and moaning, deafening to
the ears of the marching men. They sensed conflict all round them, and only a little was visible.
Over most of the castle an unearthly glow hung, wax-ing and waning, defending a gibbering wretch of a
sor-cerer who knew that he was doomed if once the Lords of the Flame gave way to the roaring Wind
Giants.
Elric smiled without humour as he observed the war.
On the supernatural plane, he now had little to fear. But there was still the castle and he had no extra
super-natural aid to help him take that. Swordplay and skill in battle was the only hope against the
ferocious desert warriors who now crowded the battlements, preparing to destroy the two hundred men
who came against them.
Up rose the Dragon Standards their cloth-of-gold fabric
flashing in the eerie glow. Spread out, walking slowly, the sons of Imrryr moved forward to do battle.
Up, also, rose the siege ladders as captains directed war-riors to begin the assault. The defenders' faces
were pale spots against the dark stone and thin shouts came from them; but it was impossible to catch
their words.
Two great battle-rams, fashioned the day before, were brought to the vanguard of the approaching
warriors. The narrow causeway was a dangerous one to pass over, but it was the only means of crossing
the moat at ground level. Twenty men carried each of the great iron-tipped rams and now they began to
run forward while arrows hailed downwards. Their shields protecting them from most of the shafts, the 
warriors reached the causeway and rushed across it. Now the first ram con-nected with the gate. It
seemed to Elric as he watched this operation that nothing of wood and iron could withstand the vicious
impact of the ram, but the gates shivered almost imperceptibly-and held!
Like vampires, hungry for blood, the men howled and staggered aside crabwise to let pass the log held
by their comrades. Again the gates shivered, more easily noticed this time, but they yet held.
Dyvim Tvar roared encouragement to those now scaling the siege ladders. These were brave, almost desperate
men, for few of the first climbers would reach the top and even if they were successful, they
would be hard-pressed to stay alive until their comrades arrived.
Boiling lead hissed from great cauldrons set on spindles so that they could be easily emptied and filled
quickly. Many a brave Imrryrian warrior fell earth-wards, dead from the searing metal before he reached
the sharp rocks beneath. Large stones were released out of leather bags hanging from rotating pulleys
which could swing out beyond the battlements and rain bone-crushing death on the besiegers. But still
the invaders advanced, voicing half-a-hundred war-shouts and steadily scaling their long ladders, whilst
their comrades, using a shield barrier still, to protect their heads, concentrated on breaking down the
gates.
Elric and his two companions could do little to help
the sealers or the rammers at that stage. All three were hand-to-hand fighters, leaving even the archery to
their rear ranks of bowmen who stood in rows and shot their shafts high into the castle defenders.
The gates were beginning to give. Cracks and splits appeared in them, ever widening. Then, all at once,
when hardly expected, the right gate creaked on tor-tured hinges and fell. A triumphant roar erupted
from the throats of the invaders and, dropping their hold on the logs, they led their companions through
the breach, axes and maces swinging like scythes and flails before them-and enemy heads springing from
necks like wheat from the stalk.
"The castle is ours!" shouted Moonglum, running for-ward and upward towards the gap in the archway.
"The castle's taken."
"Speak not too hastily of victory," replied Dyvim Tvar, but he laughed as he spoke and ran as fast as the
others to reach the castle.
"And where is your doom, now?" Elric called to his fellow Melnibonean, then broke off sharply when
Dyvim Tvar's face clouded and his mouth set grimly. For a mo-ment there was tension between them,
even as they ran, then Dyvim Tvar laughed loud and made a joke of it. "It lies somewhere, Elric, it lies
somewhere-but let us not worry about such things, for if my doom hangs over me, I cannot stop its
descent when my hour arrives!" He slapped Elric's shoulder, feeling for the albino's unchar-acteristic
confusion.
Then they were under the mighty archway and in the courtyard of the castle where savage fighting had
de-veloped almost into single duels, enemy choosing enemy and fighting him to the death.
Stormbringer was the first of the three men's blades to take blood and send a desert man's soul to Hell.
The song it sang as it was lashed through the air in strong strokes was an evil one-evil and triumphant.
The dark-faced desert warriors were famous for their courage and skill with swords. Their curved blades
were reaping havoc in the Imrryrian ranks for, at that stage, the desert men far outnumbered the
Melnibonean force.
Somewhere above, the inspired sealers had got a firm foothold on the battlements and were closing with
the men of Nikorn, driving them back, forcing many over the unrailed edges of the parapets. A falling,
still screaming warrior plummeted down, to land almost on Elric, knocking his shoulder and causing him
to fall heavily to the blood-and-rain-slick cobbles. A badly scarred desert man, quick to see his chance,
moved for-ward with a gloating look on his travesty of a face. His scimitar moved up, poised to hack
Elric's neck from his shoulders, and then his helmet split open and his fore-head spurted a sudden gout of
blood.
Dyvim Tvar wrenched a captured axe from the skull of the slain warrior and grinned at Elric as the
albino rose.
"We'll both live to see victory, yet," he shouted over the din of the warring elementals above them and
the sound of clashing arms. "My doom, I will escape until-" He broke off, a look of surprise on his fineboned
face, and Elric's stomach twisted inside him as he saw a steel point appear in Dyvim Tvar's right
side. Behind the Dragon Master, a maliciously smiling desert warrior pulled his blade from Dyvim
Tvar's body. Elric cursed and rushed forward. The man put up his blade to de-fend himself, backing
hurriedly away from the infuriat-ed albino. Stormbringer swung up and then down, it howled a deathsong
and sheared right through the curved steel of Elric's opponent-and it kept on going, straight through
the man's shoulder blade, splitting him half in two. Elric turned back to Dyvim Tvar who was still
standing up, but was pale and strained. His blood dripped from his wound and seeped through his garments.
"How badly are you hurt?" Elric said anxiously. "Can you tell?"
"That trollspawn's sword passed through my ribs, I think-no vitals were harmed." Dyvim Tvar gasped
and tried to smile. "I'm sure I'd know if he'd made more of the wound."
Then he fell. And when Elric turned him, he looked
into a dead and staring face. The Dragon Master, Lord
of the Dragon Caves, would never tend his beasts again.
Elric felt sick and weary as he got up, standing over the body of his kinsman. Because of me, he thought,
an-other fine man has died. But this was the only conscious thought he allowed himself for the
meantime. He was forced to defend himself from the slashing swords of a couple of desert men who
came at him in a rush.
The archers, their work done outside, came running through the breach in the gate and their arrows
poured into the enemy ranks.
Elric shouted loudly: "My kinsman Dyvim Tvar lies dead, stabbed in the back by a desert warrior-avenge
him brethren. Avenge the Dragon Master of Imrryr!"
A low moaning came from the throats of the Melniboneans
and their attack was even more, ferocious than
before. Elric called to a bunch of axe-men who ran
down from the battlements, their victory assured,
"You men, follow me. We can avenge the blood that Theleb K'aarna took!" He had a good idea of the
geog-raphy of the castle.
Moonglum shouted from somewhere. "One moment,
Elric, and I'll join you!" A desert warrior fell, his back to Elric, and from behind him emerged a grinning
Moonglum, his sword covered in blood from point to pommel.
Elric led the way to a small door, set into the main tower of the castle. He pointed at it and spoke to the
axe-men. "Set to with your axes, lads, and hurry!"
Grimly, the axe-men began to hack at the tough tim-ber. Impatiently, Elric watched as the wood chips
started to fly.
The conflict was appalling. Theleb K'aarna sobbed in frustration. Kakatal, the Fire Lord, and his minions
were having little effect on the Wind Giants. Their power appeared to be increasing if anything. The sorcerer
gnawed his knuckles and quaked in his chamber while below him the human warriors fought, bled
and died. Theleb K'aarna made himself concentrate on one thing only-total destruction of the Lasshaar
forces. But he knew, somehow, even then, that sooner or later, in one way or another, he was doomed.
The axes drove deeper and deeper into the stout tim-ber. At last it gave. "We're through, my lord," one of
the axe-men indicated the gaping hole they'd made.
Elric reached his arm through the gap and prised up the bar which secured the door. The bar moved upwards
and then fell with a clatter to the stone flagging. Elric put his shoulder to the door and pushed.
Above them, now, two huge, almost-human figures had appeared in the sky, outlined against the night.
One was golden and glowing like the sun and seemed to wield a great sword of fire. The other was dark
blue and silver, writhing, smoke-like, with a flickering spear of restless orange in his hand.
Misha and Kakatal clashed. The outcome of their mighty struggle might well decide Theleb K'aarna's
fate.
"Quickly," Elric said. "Upwards!"
They ran up the stairs. The stairs which led to The-leb K'aarna's chamber.
Suddenly the men were forced to stop as they came to a door of jet-black, studded with crimson iron. It
had no keyhole, no bolts, no bars, but it was quite secure. Elric directed the axe-men to begin hewing at
it. All six struck at the door in unison.
In unison, they screamed and vanished. Not even a wisp of smoke remained to mark where they had
disap-peared.
Moonglum staggered backwards, eyes wide in fear. He was backing away from Elric who remained
firmly by the door, Stormbringer throbbing in his hand. "Get out, Elric-this is a sorcery of terrible power.
Let your friends of the air finish the wizard!"
Elric shouted half-hysterically: "Magic is best fought by magic!" He hurled his whole body behind the
blow which he struck at the black door. Stormbringer whined into it, shrieked as if in victory and howled
like a soul-hungry demon. There was a blinding flash, a roaring in Elric's ears, a sense of weightlessness;
and then the door had crashed inwards. Moonglum witnessed this-he had remained against his will.
"Stormbringer has rarely failed me, Moonglum," cried
Elric as he leapt through the aperture. "Come, we have
reached Theleb K'aarna's den-" He broke off, staring at the gibbering thing on the floor. It had been a
man. It had been Theleb K'aarna. Now it was hunched and twisted-sitting in the middle of a broken
pentacle and tittering to itself.
Suddenly, intelligence came into its eyes. "Too late for vengeance, Lord Elric," it said. "I have won, you
see-I have claimed your vengeance as my own."
Grim-faced and speechless, Elric stepped forward, lifted Stormbringer and brought the moaning
runesword down into the sorcerer's skull. He left it there for several moments.
"Drink your fill, hell-blade," he murmured. "We have earned it, you and I."
Overhead, there was a sudden silence.
SIX
"It's untrue! You lie!" screamed the frightened man. "We were not responsible." Pilarmo faced the group
of leading citizens. Behind the overdressed merchant were his three colleagues-those who had earlier
met Elric and Moonglum in the tavern.
One of the accusing citizens pointed a chubby finger towards the north and Nikorn's palace.
"So-Nikorn was an enemy of all other traders in Bakshaan. That I accept. But now a horde of bloodyhanded
reavers attack his castle with the aid of demons-and Elric of Melnibone leads them! You know
that you were responsible-the gossip's all over the city. You employed Elric-and this is what's
happened!"
"But we didn't know he would go to such lengths to kill Nikorn!" Fat Tormiel wrung his hands, his face
ag-grieved and afraid. "You are wronging us. We only ..."
"We're wronging you!" Faratt, spokesman for his fel-low citizens, was thick-lipped and florid. He waved
his hands in angry exasperation. "When Elric and his jackals have done with Nikorn-they'll come to the
city. Fool! That is what the albino sorcerer planned to begin with. He was only mocking you-for you
provided him with an excuse. Armed men we can fight-but not foul sorcery!"
"What shall we do? What shall we do? Bakshaan will be razed within the day!" Tormiel turned on
Pilarmo. "This was your idea-you think of a plan!"
Pilarmo stuttered: "We could pay a ransom-bribe them-give them enough money to satisfy them."
"And who shall give this money?" asked Faratt.
Again the argument began.
Elric looked with distaste at Theleb K'aarna's broken corpse. He turned away and faced a blanch-featured 
Moonglum who said hoarsely: "Let's away, now, Elric. Yishana awaits you in Bakshaan as she
promised. You must keep your end of the bargain I made for you."
Elric nodded wearily. "Aye-the Imrryrians seem to have taken the castle by the sound of it. We'll leave
them to their spoiling and get out while we may. Will you allow me a few moments here, alone? The
sword re-jects the soul."
Moonglum sighed thankfully. "I'll join you in the courtyard within the quarter hour. I wish to claim some
measure of the spoils." He left clattering down the stairs while Elric remained standing over his enemy's
body. He spread out his arms, the sword, dripping blood, still in his hand.
"Dyvim Tvar," he cried, "You and our countrymen have been avenged. Let any evil one who holds the
soul of Dyvim Tvar release it now and take instead the soul of Theleb K'aarna."
Within the room something invisible and intangiblebut
sensed all the same-flowed and hovered over the
sprawled body of Theleb K'aarna. Elric looked out of
the window and thought he heard the beating of dragon
wings-smelled the acrid breath of dragons-saw a shape
winging across the dawn sky bearing Dyvim Tvar the Dragon Master away.
Elric half-smiled. "The Gods of Melnibone protect thee wherever thou art," he said quietly and turned
away from the carnage, leaving the room.
On the stairway, he met Nikorn of Ilmar.
The merchant's rugged face was full of anger. He trembled with rage. There was a big sword in his hand.
"So I've found you, wolf," he said. "I gave you your life-and you have done this to me!"
Elric said tiredly: "It was to be. But I gave my word that I would not take your life and, believe me, I
would not, Nikorn, even had I not pledged my word."
Nikorn stood two steps from the door blocking the exit. "Then I'll take yours. Come-engage!" He moved
out into the courtyard, half-stumbled over an Imrryrian corpse, righted himself and waited, glowering,
for Elric to emerge. Elric did so, his runesword sheathed.
"No."
"Defend yourself, wolf!"
Automatically, the albino's right hand crossed to his sword hilt, but he still did not unsheath it. Nikorn
cursed and aimed a well-timed blow which barely missed the white-faced sorcerer. He skipped back and
now he tugged out Stormbringer, still reluctant, and stood poised and wary, waiting for the Bakshaanite's
next move.
Elric intended simply to disarm Nikorn. He did not want to kill or maim this brave man who had spared
him when he had been entirely at the other's mercy.
Nikorn swung another powerful stroke at Elric and the albino parried. Stormbringer was moaning softly,
shuddering and pulsating. Metal clanged and then the fight was on in full earnest as Nikorn's rage turned
to calm, possessed fury. Elric was forced to defend himself with all his skill and power. Though older
than the al-bino, and a city merchant, Nikorn was a superb swords-man. His speed was fantastic and, at
times, Elric was not on the defensive only because he desired it.
But something was happening to the runeblade. It
was twisting in Elric's hand and forcing him to make a
counter-attack. Nikorn backed away-a light akin to fear in his eyes as he realised the potency of Elric's
hell-forged steel. The merchant fought grimly-and Elric did not fight at all. He felt entirely in the power
of the whining sword which hacked and cut at Nikorn's guard.
Stormbringer suddenly shifted in Elric's hand. Nikorn screamed. The runesword left Elric's grasp and
plunged on its own accord towards the heart of his opponent.
"No!" Elric tried to catch hold of his blade but could not. Stormbringer plunged into Nikorn's great heart
and wailed in demoniac triumph. "No!" Elric got hold of the hilt and tried to pull it from Nikorn. The
merchant shrieked in hell-brought agony. He should have been dead.
He still half-lived.
"It's taking me-the thrice-damned thing is taking me!" Nikorn gurgled horribly, clutching at the black
steel with hands turned to claws. "Stop it, Elric-I beg you, stop it! Please!"
Elric tried again to tug the blade from Nikorn's heart. He could not. It was rooted in flesh, sinew and
vitals. It moaned greedily, drinking into it all that was the being of Nikorn of Ilmar. It sucked the lifeforce
from the dy-ing man and all the while its voice was soft and disgust-ingly sensuous. Still Elric
struggled to pull the sword free. It was impossible. "Damn you!" he moaned. "This man was almost my
friend-I gave him my word not to kill him." But Stormbringer, though sentient, could not hear its master.
Nikorn shrieked once more, the shriek dying to a low, lost whimper. And then his body died.
It died-and the soul-stuff of Nikorn joined the souls
of the countless others, friends, kin and enemies who
had gone to feed that which fed Elric of Melnibone
Elric sobbed.
"Why is this curse upon me? Why?"
He collapsed to the ground in the dirt and the blood.
Minutes later, Moonglum came upon his friend lying face downward. He grasped Elric by his shoulder
and turned him. He shuddered when he saw the albino's ag-ony-racked face.
"What happened?"
Elric raised himself on one elbow and pointed to where Nikorn's body lay a few feet away. "Another,
Moonglum. Oh, curse this blade!"
Moonglum said uncomfortably: "He would have killed you no doubt. Do not think about it. Many a
word's been broken through no fault of he who gave it. Come, my friend, Yishana awaits us in the
Tavern of the Purple Dove."
Elric struggled upright and began to walk slowly towards the battered gates of the palace where horses
awaited them.
As they rode for Bakshaan, not knowing what was troubling the people of that city, Elric tapped Stormbringer
which hung, once more, at his side. His eyes were hard and moody, turned inwards on his own
feelings.
"Be wary of this devil-blade, Moonglum. It kills the foe-but savours the blood of friends and kin-folk
most."
Moonglum shook his head quickly, as if to clear it, and looked away. He said nothing.
Elric made as if to speak again but then changed his mind. He needed to talk, then. He needed to-but
there was nothing to say at all.
Pilarmo scowled. He stared, hurt-faced, as his slaves struggled with his chests of treasure, lugging them
out to pile them in the street beside his great house. In other parts of the city, Pilarmo's three colleagues
were also in various stages of heart-break. Their treasure, too, was being dealt with in a like manner. The
burghers of Bakshaan had decided who was to pay any possible ran-som.
And then a ragged citizen was shambling down the street, pointing behind him and shouting.
"The albino and his companion-at the North gate!"
The burghers who stood near to Pilarmo exchanged glances. Faratt swallowed.
He said: "Elric comes to bargain. Quick. Open the treasure chests and tell the city guard to admit him."
One of the citizens scurried off.
Within a few minutes, while Faratt and the rest worked frantically to expose Pilarmo's treasure to the
gaze of the approaching albino, Elric was galloping up the street, Moonglum beside him. Both men were
ex-pressionless. They knew enough not to show their puz-zlement.
"What's this?" Elric said, casting a look at Pilarmo.
Faratt cringed. "Treasure," he whined. "Yours, Lord Elric-for you and your men. There's much more.
There is no need to use sorcery. No need for your men to at-tack us. The treasure here is fabulous-its
value is enor-mous. Will you take it and leave the city in peace?"
Moonglum almost smiled, but he controlled his fea-tures.
Elric said coolly: "It will do. I accept it. Make sure this and the rest is delivered to my men at Nikorn's
castle or we'll be roasting you and your friends over open fires by the morrow."
Faratt coughed suddenly, trembling. "As you say, Lord Elric. It shall be delivered."
The two men wheeled their horses in the direction of the Tavern of the Purple Dove. When they were out
of earshot Moonglum said: "From what I gathered, back there, it's Master Pilarmo and his friends who
are pay-ing that unasked for toll."
Elric was incapable of any real humour, but he half-chuckled. "Aye. I'd planned to rob them from the
start-and now their own fellows have done it for us. On our way back, we shall take our pick of the
spoils."
He rode on and reached the tavern. Yishana was wait-ing there, nervously, dressed for travelling.
When she saw Elric's face she sighed with satisfaction and smiled silkily. "So Theleb K'aarna is dead,"
she said. "Now we can resume our interrupted relationship, Elric."
The albino nodded. "That was my part of the bar-gain-you kept yours when you helped Moonglum to get
my sword back for me." He showed no emotion.
She embraced him, but he drew back. "Later," he murmured. "But that is one promise I shall not break,
Yishana."
He helped the puzzled woman mount her waiting horse. They rode back towards Pilarmo's house.
She asked: "And what of Nikorn-is he safe? I liked that man."
"He died," Elric's voice was strained.
"How?" she asked.
"Because, like all merchants," Elric answered, "he bar-gained too hard."
There was an unnatural silence among the three as they made their horses speed faster towards the Gates
of Bakshaan, and Elric did not stop when the others did, to take their pick of Pilarmo's riches. He rode
on, unsee-ing, and the others had to spur their steeds in order to catch up with him, two miles beyond the
city.
Over Bakshaan, no breeze stirred in the gardens of the rich. No winds came to blow cool on the sweating
faces of the poor. Only the sun blazed in the heavens, round and red, and a shadow, shaped like a dragon,
moved across it once, and then was gone.
BOOK TWO
Kings in Darkness
Three Kings in Darkness lie,
Gutheran of Org, and I,
Under a bleak and sunless sky
The third Beneath the Hill.
-Song of Veerkad
by James Cawthorn.
ONE
Elric, Lord of the lost and sundered Empire of Melnibone
rode like a fanged wolf from a trap-all slavering
madness and mirth. He rode from Nadsokor, City of
Beggars, and there was hate in his wake for he had been
recognised as their old enemy before he could obtain the
secret he had sought there. Now they hounded him and
the grotesque little man who rode laughing at Elric's
side; Moonglum the Outlander, from Elwher and the
unmapped East
The flames of brands devoured the velvet of the night as the yelling, ragged throng pushed their bony
nags in pursuit of the pair.
Starvelings and tattered jackals that they were, there was strength in their gaudy numbers and long
knives and bone bows glinted in the brandlight. They were too strong for a couple of men to fight, too
few to represent serious danger in a hunt, so Elric and Moonglum had chosen to leave the city without
dispute and now sped towards the full and rising moon which stabbed its sickly beams through the
darkness to show them the dis-turbing waters of the Varkalk River and a chance of es-cape from the
incensed mob.
They had half a mind to stand and face the mob, since the Varkalk was their only alternative. But they
knew well what the beggars would do to them, whereas they were uncertain what would become of them
once they had entered the river. The horses reached the sloping banks of the Varkalk and reared, with
hooves lashing.
Cursing, the two men spurred the steeds and forced
them down towards the water. Into the river the horses
plunged, snorting and spluttering. Into the river which led a roaring course towards the hell-spawned
Forest of Troos which lay within the borders of Org, country of necromancy and rotting, ancient evil.
Elric blew water away from his mouth and coughed. "They'll not follow us to Troos, I think," he shouted
at his companion.
Moonglum said nothing. He only grinned, showing his white teeth and the unhidden fear in his eyes. The
horses swam strongly with the current and behind them the ragged mob shrieked in frustrated blood-lust
while some of their number laughed and jeered.
"Let the forest do our work for us!"
Elric laughed back at them, wildly, as the horses swam on down the dark, straight river, wide and deep,
towards a sun-starved morning, cold and spiky with ice. Scat-tered, slim-peaked crags loomed on either
side of the flat plain, through which the river ran swiftly. Green-tinted masses of jutting blacks and
browns spread colour through the rocks and the grass was waving on the plain as if for some purpose.
Through the dawnlight, the beg-gar crew chased along the banks, but eventually gave up their quarry to
return, shuddering, to Nadsokor.
When they had gone, Elric and Moonglum made their mounts swim towards the banks and climb them,
stum-bling, to the top where rocks and grass had already given way to sparse forest land which rose
starkly on all sides, staining the earth with sombre shades. The foliage waved jerkily, as if alive-sentient.
It was a forest of malignantly erupting blooms, blood-coloured and sickly-mottled. A forest of bending,
sinu-ously smooth trunks, black and shiny; a forest of spiked leaves of murky purples and gleaming
greens-certainly an unhealthy place if judged only by the odour of rot-ting vegetation which was almost
unbearable, impinging as it did upon the fastidious nostrils of Elric and Moon-glum.
Moonglum wrinkled his nose and jerked his head in the direction they had come. "Back now?" he
inquired.
"We can avoid Troos and cut swiftly across a corner of
Org to be in Bakshaan in just over a day. What say you, Elric?"
Elric frowned. "I don't doubt they'd welcome us in Bakshaan with the same warmth we received in Nadsokor.
They'll not have forgotten the destruction we wrought there-and the wealth we acquired from their
merchants. No, I have a fancy to explore the forest a little. I have heard tales of Org and its unnatural
forest and should like to investigate the truth of them. My blade and sorcery will protect us, if
necessary."
Moonglum sighed. "Elric-this once, let us not court the danger."
Elric smiled icily. His scarlet eyes blazed out of his dead white skin with peculiar intensity. "Danger? It
can bring only death."
"Death is not to my liking, just yet," Moonglum said. "The fleshpots of Bakshaan, or if you prefer-
Jadmar-on the other hand..."
But Elric was already urging his horse onward, head-ing for the forest. Moonglum sighed and followed.
Soon dark blossoms hid most of the sky, which was dark enough, and they could see only a little way in
all directions. The rest of the forest seemed vast and sprawling; they could sense this, though sight of
most of it was lost in the depressing gloom.
Moonglum recognised the forest from descriptions he had heard from mad-eyed travellers who drank
purpose-fully in the shadows of Nadsokor's taverns.
"This is the Forest of Troos, sure enough," he said to Elric. "It's told of how the Doomed Folk released
tremendous forces upon the earth and caused terrible changes among men, beasts and vegetation. This
forest is the last they created, and the last to perish."
"A child will always hate its parents at certain times," Elric said mysteriously.
"Children of whom to be extremely wary, I should think," Moonglum retorted. "Some say that when they
were at the peak of their power, they had no Gods to frighten them."
"A daring people, indeed," Elric replied, with a faint
smile. "They have my respect. Now fear and the Gods are back and that, at least, is comforting."
Moonglum puzzled over this for a short time, and then, eventually, said nothing.
He was beginning to feel uneasy.
The place was full of malicious rustlings and whis-pers, though no living animal inhabited it, as far as
they could tell. There was a discomforting absence of birds, rodents or insects and, though they normally
had no love for such creatures, they would have appreciated their company in the disconcerting forest.
In a quavering voice, Moonglum began to sing a song in the hope that it would keep his spirits up and his
thoughts off the lurking forest.
"A grin and a word is my trade;
From these, my profit is made.
Though my body's not tall and my courage is small,
My fame will take longer to fade."
So singing, with his natural amiability returning, Moonglum rode after the man he regarded as a friend-a
friend who possessed something akin to mastery over him, though neither admitted it.
Elric smiled at Moonglum's song. "To sing of one's own lack of size and absence of courage is not an
action designed to ward off one's enemies, Moonglum."
"But this way I offer no provocation," Moonglum re-plied glibly. "If I sing of my shortcomings, I am
safe. If I were to boast of my talents, then someone might con-sider this to be a challenge and decide to
teach me a lesson."
"True," Elric assented gravely, "and well-spoken."
He began pointing at certain blossoms and leaves, re-marking upon their alien tint and texture, referring
to them in words which Moonglum could not understand, though he knew the words to be part of a
sorcerer's vo-cabulary. The albino seemed to be untroubled by the fears which beset the Eastlander, but
often, Moonglum knew, appearances with Elric could hide the opposite of what they indicated.
They stopped for a short break while Elric sifted through some of the samples he had torn from trees and
plants. He carefully placed his prizes in his belt-pouch but would say nothing of why he did so to
Moonglum.
"Come," he said, "Troos's mysteries await us."
But then a new voice, a woman's, said softly from the gloom: "Save the excursion for another day,
strangers."
Elric reined his horse, one hand at Stormbringer's hilt. The voice had had an unusual effect upon him. It
had been low, deep and had, for a moment, sent the pulse in his throat throbbing. Incredibly, he sensed
that he was suddenly standing on one of Fate's roads, but where the road would take him, he did not
know. Quickly, he controlled his mind and then his body and looked towards the shadows from where
the voice had come.
"You are very kind to offer us advice, madam," he said sternly. "Come, show yourself and give explanation
..."
She rode then, very slowly, on a black-coated gelding that pranced with a power she could barely
restrain. Moonglum drew an appreciative breath for although heavy-featured, she was incredibly
beautiful. Her face and bearing was patrician, her eyes were grey-green, combining enigma and
innocence. She was very young. For all her obvious womanhood and beauty, Moonglum aged her at
seventeen or little more.
Elric frowned: "Do you ride alone?"
"I do now," she replied, trying to hide her obvious as-tonishment at the albino's colouring. "I need aidpro-tection.
Men who will escort me safely to Karlaak. There, they will be paid."
"Karlaak, by the Weeping Waste? It lies the other side of Ilmiora, a hundred leagues away and a week's
trav-elling at speed." Elric did not wait for her to reply to this statement. "We are not hirelings, madam."
"Then you are bound by the vows of chivalry, sir, and cannot refuse my request."
Elric laughed shortly. "Chivalry, madam? We come
not from the upstart nations of the South with their
strange codes and rules of behaviour. We are nobles of
older stock whose actions are governed by our own desires. You would not ask what you do, if you knew
our names."
She wetted her full lips with her tongue and said al-most timidly: "You are... ?"
"Elric of Melnibone", madam, called Elric Woman-slayer in the West, and this is Moonglum of Elwher;
he has no conscience."
She said: "There are legends-the white-faced reaver, the hell-driven sorcerer with a blade that drinks the
souls of men ..."
"Aye, that's true. And however magnified they are with the retelling, they cannot hint, those tales, at the
darker truths which lie in their origin. Now, madam, do you still seek our aid?" Elric's voice was gentle,
without menace, as he saw that she was very much afraid, al-though she had managed to control the
signs of fear and her lips were tight with determination.
"I have no choice. I am at your mercy. My father, the Senior Senator of Karlaak, is very rich. Karlaak is
called the City of the Jade Towers, as you will know, and such rare jades and ambers we have. Many
could be yours."
"Be careful, madam, lest you anger me," warned Elric, although Moonglum's bright eyes lighted with
avarice. "We are not nags to be hired or goods to be bought. Besides which," he smiled disdainfully, "I
am from crumbling Imrryr, the Dreaming City, from the Isle of the Dragon, hub of Ancient Melnibone,
and I know what beauty really is. Your baubles cannot tempt one who has looked upon the milky Heart
of Arioch, upon the blinding iridescence that throbs from the Ruby Throne, of the languorous and
unnameable colours in the Actorios stone of the Ring of Kings. These are more than jewels, madam-they
contain the life-stuff of the universe."
"I apologise, Lord Elric, and to you Sir Moonglum."
Elric laughed, almost with affection. "We are grim clowns, lady, but the Gods of Luck aided our escape
from Nadsokor and we owe them a debt. We'll escort you to Karlaak, City of the Jade Towers, and
explore the Forest of Troos another time."
Her thanks was tempered with a wary look in her eyes.
"And now we have made introductions," said Elric, "perhaps you would be good enough to give your
name and tell us your story."
"I am Zarozinia from Karlaak, a daughter of the Voashoon, the most powerful clan in South Eastern Ilmiora.
We have kinsmen in the trading cities on the coasts of Pikarayd and I went with two cousins and
my uncle to visit them."
"A perilous journey, Lady Zarozinia."
"Aye and there are not only natural dangers, sir. Two weeks ago we made our goodbyes and began the 
journey home. Safely we crossed the Straits of Vilmir and there employed men-at-arms, forming a strong
caravan to journey through Vilmir and so to Ilmiora. We skirted Nadsokor since we had heard that the
City of Beggars is inhospitable to honest travellers ..."
Here, Elric smiled: "And sometimes to dishonest trav-ellers, as we can appreciate."
Again the expression on her face showed that she had some difficulty in equating his obvious good
humour with his evil reputation. "Having skirted Nadsokor," she continued, "we came this way and
reached the borders of Org wherein, of course, Troos lies. Very warily we travelled, knowing dark Org's
reputation, along the fringes of the forest. And then we were ambushed and our hired men-at-arms
deserted us."
"Ambushed, eh?" broke in Moonglum. "By whom, madam, did you know?"
"By their unsavoury looks and squat shapes they seemed natives. They fell upon the caravan and my
uncle and cousins fought bravely but were slain. One of my cousins slapped the rump of my gelding and
sent it galloping so that I could not control it. I heard-terrible screams-mad, giggling shouts-and when I
at last brought my horse to a halt, I was lost. Later I heard you approach and waited in fear for you to
pass, thinking you also were of Org, but when I heard your accents and some of your speech, I thought
that you might help me."
"And help you we shall, madam," said Moonglum bowing gallantly from the saddle. "And I am indebted
to you for convincing Lord Elric here of your need. But for you, we should be deep in this awful forest
by now and experiencing strange terrors no doubt. I offer my sorrow for your dead kinsfolk and assure
you that you will be protected from now onwards by more than swords and brave hearts, for sorcery can
be called up if needs be."
"Let's hope there'll be no need," frowned Elric. "You talk blithely of sorcery, friend Moonglum-you who
hate the art."
Moonglum grinned.
"I was consoling the young lady, Elric. And I've had occasion to be grateful for your horrid powers. I'll
ad-mit. Now I suggest that we make camp for the night and so refreshed be on our way at dawn."
"I'll agree to that," said Elric, glancing almost with embarrassment at the girl. Again he felt the pulse in
his throat and this time he had more difficulty in control-ling it.
The girl also seemed fascinated by the albino. There was an attraction between them which might be
strong enough to throw both their destinies along wildly differ-ent paths than any they had guessed.
Night came again quickly, for the days were short in those parts. While Moonglum tended the fire,
nervously peering around him, Zarozinia, her richly embroidered cloth-of-gold gown shimmering in the
firelight, walked gracefully to where Elric sat sorting the herbs he had collected. She glanced at him
cautiously and then seeing that he was absorbed, stared at him with open curiosity.
He looked up and smiled faintly, his eyes for once un-protected, his strange face frank and pleasant.
"Some of these are healing herbs," he said, "and others are used in summoning spirits. Yet others give
unnatural strength to the imbiber and some turn men mad. They will be useful to me."
She sat down beside him, her thick-fingered hands
pushing her black hair back. Her small breasts lifted and fell rapidly.
"Are you really the terrible evil-bringer of the legends, Lord Elric? I find it hard to credit."
"I have brought evil to many places," he said, "but usually there has already been evil to match mine. I
seek -no excuses, for I know what I am and I know what I have done. I have slain malignant
sorcerers and destroyed oppressors, but I have also been responsible for slaying fine men, and a
woman, my cousin, whom I loved, I killed-or my sword did."
"And you are master of your sword?"
"I often wonder. Without it, I am helpless." He put his hand around Stormbringer's hilt. "I should be
grate-ful to it." Once again his red eyes seemed to become deeper, protecting some bitter emotion rooted
at the core of his soul.
"I'm sorry if I revived unpleasant recollection ..." "Do not feel sorry, Lady Zarozinia. The pain is within 
me-you did not put it there. In fact I'd say you relieve it greatly by your presence."
Half-startled, she glanced at him and smiled. "I am no wanton, sir," she said, "but..."
He got up quickly.
"Moonglum, is the fire going well?"
"Aye, Elric. She'll stay in for the night." Moonglum cocked his head on one side. It was unlike Elric to
make such empty queries, but Elric said nothing further so the Eastlander shrugged, turned away to
check his gear.
Since he could think of little else to say, Elric turned and said quietly, urgently: "I'm a killer and a thief,
not fit to ..."
"Lord Elric, I am ..."
"You are infatuated by a legend, that is all." "No! If you feel what I feel, then you'll know it's more."
"You are young."
"Old enough."
"Beware. I must fulfil my destiny."
"Your destiny?"
"It is no destiny at all, but an awful thing called
doom. And I have no pity except when I see something in my own soul. Then I have pity-and I pity. But
I hate to look and this is part of the doom which drives me. Not Fate, nor the Stars, nor Men, nor
Demons, nor Gods. Look at me, Zarozinia-it is Elric, poor white chosen plaything of the Gods of TimeElric
of Melni-bone who causes his own gradual and terrible destruc-tion."
"It is suicide!"
"Aye. I drive myself to slow death. And those who go with me suffer also."
"You speak falsely, Lord Elric-from guilt-madness."
"Because I am guilty, lady."
"And does Sir Moonglum go to doom with you?"
"He is unlike others-he is indestructible in his own self-assurance."
"I am confident, also, Lord Elric."
"But your confidence is that of youth, it is different"
"Need I lose it with my youth?"
"You have strength. You are as strong as we are. I'll
grant you that"
She opened her arms, rising. "Then be reconciled, Elric
of Melnibone"
And he was. He seized her, kissing her with a deeper need than that of passion. For the first time
Cymoril of Imrryr was forgotten as they lay down, together on the soft turf, oblivious of Moonglum who
polished away at his curved sword with wry jealousy.
They all slept and the fire waned.
Elric, in his joy, had forgotten, or not heeded, that he had a watch to take and Moonglum, who had no
source of strength but himself, stayed awake for as long as he could but sleep overcame him.
In the shadows of the awful trees, figures moved with shambling caution.
The misshapen men of Org began to creep inwards towards the sleepers.
Then Elric opened his eyes, aroused by instinct, stared
at Zarozinia's peaceful face beside him, moved his eyes
without turning his head and saw the danger. He rolled over, grasped Stormbringer and tugged the
runeblade from its sheath. The sword hummed, as if in anger at being awakened.
"Moonglum! Danger!" Elric bellowed in fear, for he had more to protect than his own life. The little
man's head jerked up. His curved sabre was already across his knees and he jumped to his feet, ran
towards Elric as the men of Org closed in.
"I apologise," he said.
"My fault, I.. ."
And then the men of Org were at them. Elric and Moonglum stood over the girl as she came awake, saw
the situation and did not scream. Instead she looked around for a weapon but found none. She remained
still, where she was, the only thing to do.
Smelling like offal, the gibbering creatures, some dozen of them, slashed at Elric and Moonglum with
heavy blades like cleavers, long and dangerous.
Stormbringer whined and smote through a cleaver, cut into a neck and beheaded the owner. Blood
gurgled from the corpse as it slumped back across the fire. Moonglum ducked beneath a howling
cleaver, lost his balance, fell, slashed at his opponent's legs and ham-strung him so that he collapsed
shrieking. Moonglum stayed on the ground and lunged upwards, taking an-other in the heart. Then he
sprang to his feet and stood shoulder to shoulder with Elric while Zarozinia got up behind them.
"The horses," grunted Elric. "If it's safe, try to get them."
There were still seven natives standing and Moonglum
groaned as a cleaver sliced flesh from his left arm,
retaliated, pierced the man's throat, turned slightly and
sheared off another's face. They pressed forward, taking
the attack to the incensed foe. His left hand covered
with his own blood, Moonglum painfully pulled his
long poignard from its sheath and held it with his
thumb along the handle, blocked an opponent's swing,
closed in and killed him with a ripping upward thrust
of the dagger, the action of which caused his wound to pound with agony.
Elric held his great runesword in both hands and swung it in a semi-circle, hacking down the howling
mis-shapen things. Zarozinia darted towards the horses, leaped on to her own and led the other two
towards the fighting men. Elric smote at another and got into his saddle, thanking his own forethought to
leave the equip-ment on the horses in case of danger. Moonglum quickly joined him and they thundered
out of the clearing.
"The saddle-bags," Moonglum called in greater agony than that created by his wound. "We've left the
saddle-bags!"
"What of it? Don't press your luck, my friend."
"But all our treasure's in them!"
Elric laughed, partly in relief, partly from real hu-mour. "We'll retrieve them, friend, never fear."
"I know you, Elric. You've no value for the realities."
But even Moonglum was laughing as they left the en-raged men of Org behind them and slowed to a
canter.
Elric reached and hugged Zarozinia. "You have the courage of your noble clan in your veins," he said.
"Thank you," she replied, pleased with the compli-ment, "but we cannot match such swordsmanship as
that displayed by you and Moonglum. It was fantastic."
"Thank the blade," he said shortly.
"No. I will thank you. I think you place too much re-liance upon that hell weapon, however powerful it
is."
"I need it"
"For what?"
"For my own strength and, now, to give strength to you."
"I'm no vampire," she smiled, "and need no such fear-ful strength as that supplies."
"Then be assured that I do," he told her gravely. "You would not love me if the blade did not give me
what I need. I am like a spineless sea-thing without it."
"I do not believe that, but will not dispute with you now."
They rode for a while without speaking.
Later, they stopped, dismounted, and Zarozinia put herbs that Elric had given her upon Moonglum's
wound-ed arm and began to bind it.
Elric was thinking deeply. The forest rustled with ma-cabre, sensuous sounds. "We're in the heart of
Troos," he said, "and our intention to skirt the forest has been forestalled. I have it in mind to call on the
King of Org and so round off our visit."
Moonglum laughed. "Shall we send our swords along first? And bind our own hands?" His pain was
already eased by the herbs which were having quick effect.
"I mean it. We owe, all of us, much to the men of Org. They slew Zarozinia's uncle and cousins, they
wounded you and they now have our treasure. We have many reasons for asking the King for
recompense. Also, they seem stupid and should be easy to trick."
"Aye. The King will pay us back for our lack of com-mon-sense by tearing our limbs off."
"I'm in earnest. I think we should go."
"I'll agree that I'd like our wealth returned to us. But we cannot risk the lady's safety, Elric."
"I am to be Elric's wife, Moonglum. Therefore if he visits the King of Org, I shall come too."
Moonglum lifted an eyebrow. "A quick courtship."
"She speaks the truth, however. We shall all go to Org-and sorcery will protect us from the King's uncalled-for
wrath."
"And still you wish for death and vengeance, Elric," shrugged Moonglum mounting. "Well, it's all the
same to me since your roads, whatever else, are profitable ones. You may be the Lord of Bad Luck by
your own reckoning, but you bring good luck to me, I'll say that."
"No more courting death," smiled Elric, "but we'll have some revenge, I hope."
"Dawn will be with us soon," Moonglum said. "The Orgian citadel lies six hours ride from here by my
work-ing, south-south-east by the Ancient Star, if the map I memorised in Nadsokor was correct."
"You have an instinct for direction that never fails, Moonglum. Every caravan should have such a man as
you."
"We base an entire philosophy on the stars in El-wher," Moonglum replied. "We regard them as the master
plan for everything that happens on Earth. As they revolve around the planet they see all things, past,
present and future. They are our Gods."
"Predictable Gods, at least," said Elric and they rode off towards Org with light hearts considering the
enor-mity of their risk.
TWO
Little was known of the tiny kingdom of Org save that the Forest of Troos lay within its boundaries and
to that, other nations felt, it was welcome. The people were unpleasant to look upon, for the most part,
and their bodies were stunted and strangely altered. Legend had it that they were the descendants of the
Doomed Folk. Their rulers, it was said, were shaped like normal men in so far as their outward bodily
appearance went, but their minds were warped more horribly than the limbs of their subjects.
The inhabitants were few and were generally scat-tered, ruled by their king from his citadel which was
also called Org.
It was for this citadel that Elric and his companions rode and, as they did so, Elric explained how he
planned to protect them all from the natives of Org.
In the forest he had found a particular leaf which, when used with certain invocations (which were
harmless in that the invoker was in little danger of being harmed by the spirits he marshalled) would
invest that person, and anyone else to whom he gave the drug distilled from the leaf, with temporary
invulnerability.
The spell somehow reknitted the skin and flesh structure
so that it could withstand any edge and almost any blow. Elric explained, in a rare garrulous mood,
how the drug and spell combined to achieve the effect, but his archaicisms and esoteric words meant
little to the other two.
They stopped an hour's ride from where Moonglum expected to find the citadel so that Elric could
prepare the drug and invoke the spell.
He worked swiftly over a small fire, using an al-chemist's pestle and mortar, mixing the shredded leaf
with a little water. As the brew bubbled on the fire, he drew peculiar runes on the ground, some of which
were twisted into such alien forms that they seemed to disap-pear into a different dimension and reappear
beyond it.
"Bone and blood and flesh and sinew,
Spell and spirit bind anew;
Potent potion work the life charm,
Keep its takers safe from harm."
So Elric chanted as a small pink cloud formed in the air over the fire, wavered, reformed into a spiral
shape which curled downwards into the bowl. The brew splut-tered and then was still. The albino
sorcerer said: "An old boyhood spell, so simple that I'd near forgotten it. The leaf for the potion grows
only in Troos and there-fore it is rarely possible to perform."
The brew, which had been liquid, had now solidified and Elric broke it into small pellets. "Too much,"
he warned, "taken at one time is poison, and yet the effect can last for several hours. Not always, though,
but we must accept that small risk." He handed both of them a pellet which they received dubiously.
"Swallow them just before we reach the citadel," he told them, "or in the event of the men of Org finding
us first."
Then they mounted and rode on again.
Some miles to the south-east of Troos, a blind man sang a grim song in his sleep and so woke himself...
They reached the brooding citadel of Org at dusk.
Guttural voices shouted at them from the battlements of the square-cut ancient dwelling place of the
Kings of Org. The thick rock oozed moisture and was corroded by lichen and sickly, mottled moss. The
only entrance large enough for a mounted man to pass through was reached by a path almost a foot deep
in evil-smelling black mud.
"What's your business at the Royal Court of Gutheran the Mighty?"
They could not see who asked the question.
"We seek hospitality and an audience with your liege," called Moonglum cheerfully, successfully hiding
his nervousness. "We bring important news to Org."
A twisted face peered down from the battlements, "Enter strangers and be welcome," it said unwelcomingly.
The heavy wooden drawgate shifted upwards to allow them entrance and the horses pushed their way
slowly through the mud and so into the courtyard of the cita-del.
Overhead, the grey sky was a racing field of black tat-tered clouds which streamed towards the horizon
as if to escape the horrid boundaries of Org and the disgusting Forest of Troos.
The courtyard was covered, though not so deeply, with the same foul mud as had unpaired their progress
to the citadel. It was full of heavy, unmoving shadow. On Elric's right, a flight of steps went up to an
arched entrance which was hung, partially, with the same unhealthy lichen he had seen on the outer walls
and, also, in the Forest of Troos.
Through this archway, brushing at the lichen with a
pale, beringed hand, a tall man came and stood on the
top step, regarding the visitors through heavy-lidded
eyes. He was, in contrast to the others, handsome, with a
massive, leonine head and long hair as white as Elric's;
although the hair on the head of this great, solid man
was somewhat dirty, tangled, unbrushed. He was dressed
in a heavy jerkin of quilted, embossed leather, a yellow
kit which reached to his ankles and he carried a wide-
bladed dagger, naked in his belt. He was older than El-ric, aged between forty and fifty and his powerful
if somewhat decadent face was seamed and pock-marked.
He stared at them in silence and did not welcome them; instead he signed to one of the battlement guards
who caused the drawgate to be lowered. It came down with a crash, blocking off their way of escape.
"Kill the men and keep the woman," said the massive man in a low monotone. Elric had heard dead men
speak in that manner.
As planned, Elric and Moonglum stood either side of Zarozinia and remained where they were, arms
folded.
Puzzled, shambling creatures came warily at them, their loose trousers dragging in the mud, their hands
hidden by the long shapeless sleeves of their filthy gar-ments. They swung their cleavers. Elric felt a
faint shock as the blade thudded on to his arm, but that was all. Moonglum's experience was similar.
The men fell back, amazement and confusion on their bestial faces.
The tall man's eyes widened. He put one ring-covered hand to his thick lips, chewing at a nail.
"Our swords have no effect upon them, King! They do not cut and they do not bleed. What are these
folk?"
Elric laughed theatrically. "We are not common folk, little human, be assured. We are the messengers of
the Gods and come to your King with a message from our great masters. Do not worry, we shall not
harm you since we are in no danger of being harmed. Stand aside and make us welcome."
Elric could see that King Gutheran was puzzled and not absolutely taken in by his words. Elric cursed to
himself. He had measured their intelligence by those he had seen. This king, mad or not, was much more
intelli-gent, was going to be harder to deceive. He led the way up the steps towards glowering Gutheran.
"Greetings, King Gutheran. The Gods have, at last, returned to Org and wish you to know this."
"Org has had no Gods to worship for an eternity," said Gutheran hollowly, turning back into the citadel.
"Why should we accept them now?"
"You are impertinent, King."
"And you are audacious. How do I know you come from the Gods?" He walked ahead of them, leading
them through the low-roofed halls.
"You saw that the swords of your subjects had no ef-fect upon us."
"True. I'll take that incident as proof for the mo-ment. I suppose there must be a banquet in your-honourI
shall order it. Be welcome, messengers." His words were ungracious but it was virtually impossible to
detect anything from Gutheran's tone, since the man's voice stayed at the same pitch.
Elric pushed his heavy riding cloak back from his shoulders and said lightly: "We shall mention your
kindness to our masters."
The Court was a place of gloomy halls and false laughter and although Elric put many questions to
Gutheran, the king would not answer them, or did so by means of ambiguous phrases which meant
nothing. They were not given chambers wherein they could re-fresh themselves but instead stood about
for several hours in the main hall of the citadel and Gutheran, while he was with them and not giving
orders for the banquet, sat slumped on his throne and chewed at bis nails, ignoring them.
"Pleasant hospitality," whispered Moonglum.
"Elric-how long will the effects of the drug last?" Zarozinia had remained close to him. He put his arm
around her shoulders. "I do not know. Not much long-er. But it has served its purpose. I doubt if they
will try to attack us a second time. However, beware of other at-tempts, subtler ones, upon our lives."
The main hall, which had a higher roof than the others
and was completely surrounded by a gallery which
ran around it well above the floor, fairly close to the
room, was chilly and unwarmed. No fires burned in the
several hearths, which were open and let into the floor,
and the walls dripped moisture and were undecorated;
damp, solid stone, timeworn and gaunt. There were not
even rushes upon the floor which was strewn with old bones and pieces of decaying food.
"Hardly house-proud, are they?" commented Moon-glum looking around him with distaste and glancing
at brooding Gutheran who was seemingly oblivious of their presence.
A servitor shambled into the hall and whispered a few words to the king. He nodded and arose, leaving
the Great Hall.
Soon men came in, carrying benches and tables and began to place them about the hall.
The banquet was, at last, due to commence. And the air had menace in it.
The three visitors sat together on the right of the King who had donned a richly jewelled chain of kingship,
whilst his son and several pale-faced female mem-bers of the Royal line sat on the left, unspeaking
even among themselves.
Prince Hurd, a sullen-faced youth who seemed to bear a resentment against his father, picked at the
unappetis-ing food which was served them all.
He drank heavily of the wine which had little flavour but was strong, fiery stuff and this seemed to warm
the company a little.
"And what do the Gods want of us poor folk of Org?"
Hurd said, staring hard at Zarozinia with more than,
friendly interest
Elric answered: "They ask nothing of you but your recognition. In return they will, on occasions, help
you."
"That is all?" Hurd laughed. "That is more than those from the Hill can offer, eh, father?"
Gutheran turned his great head slowly to regard his son.
"Yes," he murmured, and the word seemed to carry warning.
Moonglum said: "The Hill-what is that?"
He got no reply. Instead a high-pitched laugh came
from the entrance to the Great Hall. A thin, gaunt man
stood there staring ahead with a fixed gaze. His features,
though emaciated, strongly resembled Gutheran's. He
carried a stringed instrument and plucked at the gut so that it wailed and moaned with melancholy
insistence.
Kurd said savagely: "Look, father, 'tis blind Veerkad, the minstrel, your brother. Shall he sing for us?"
"Sing?"
"Shall he sing his songs, father"
Gutheran's mouth trembled and twisted and he said after a moment: "He may entertain our guests with an
heroic ballad if he wishes, but..."
"But certain other songs he shall not sing ..." Kurd grinned maliciously. He seemed to be tormenting his
fa-ther deliberately in some way which Elric could not guess. Kurd shouted at the blind man: "Come
Uncle Veerkad-sing!"
"There are strangers present," said Veerkad hollowly
above the wail of his own music. "Strangers in Org"
Hurd giggled and drank more wine. Gutheran scowled and continued to tremble, gnawing at his
nails. Elric called: "We'd appreciate a song, minstrel." "Then you'll have the song of the Three Kings in
Darkness, strangers, and hear the ghastly story of the Kings of Org."
"No!" shouted Gutheran, leaping from his place, but
Veerkad was already singing:
"Three Kings in darkness lie,
Gutheran of Org, and I,
Under a bleak and sunless skyThe
third beneath the Hill
When shall the third arise
Only when another dies..."
"Stop!" Gutheran got up in an obviously insane rage and stumbled across the table, trembling in terror,
his face blanched, striking at the blind man, his brother. Two blows and the minstrel fell, slumping to
the floor and not moving. "Take him out! Do not let him enter again." The king shrieked and foam
flecked his lips.
Hurd, sober for a moment, jumped across the table, scattering dishes and cups and took his father's arm.
"Be calm, father. I have a new plan for our entertain-ment."
"You! You seek my throne. 'Twas you who goaded Veerkad to sing his dreadful song. You know I
cannot listen without ..." He stared at the door. "One day the legend shall be realised and the Hill-King
shall come. Then shall I, you and Org perish."
"Father," Hurd was smiling horribly, "let the female visitor dance for us a dance of the Gods."
"What"
"Let the woman dance for us, father."
Elric heard him. By now the drug must have worn off. He could not afford to show his hand by offering
his companions further doses. He got to his feet.
"What sacrilege do you speak, Prince"
"We have given you entertainment. It is the custom in Org for our visitors to give us entertainment also."
The hall was filled with menace. Elric regretted his plan to trick the men of Org. But there was nothing
he could do. He had intended to exact tribute from them in the name of the Gods, but obviously these
mad men feared more immediate and tangible dangers than any the Gods might represent.
He had made a mistake, put the lives of his friends in danger as well as his own. What should he do?
Zarozinia murmured: "I have learned dances in Ilmiora where all ladies are taught the art. Let me dance
for them. It might placate them and bedazzle them to make our work easier."
"Arioch knows our work is hard enough now. I was a fool to have conceived this plan. Very well,
Zarozinia, dance for them, but with caution." He shouted at Hurd:
"Our companion will dance for you, to show you the beauty that the Gods create. Then you must pay the
tribute, for our masters grow impatient."
"The tribute" Gutheran looked up. "You mentioned nothing of tribute."
"Your recognition of the Gods must take the form of precious stones and metals, King Gutheran. I
thought you to understand that."
"You seem more like common thieves than uncommon
messengers, my friends. We are poor in Org and have nothing to give away to charlatans."
"Beware of your words, King!" Elric's clear voice echoed warningly through the hall.
"We'll see the dance and then judge the truth of what you've told us."
Elric seated himself, grasped Zarozinia's hand beneath the table as she arose, giving her comfort.
She walked gracefully and confidently into the centre of the hall and there began to dance. Elric, who
loved her, was amazed at her splendid grace and artistry. She danced the old, beautiful dances of Ilmiora,
entrancing even the thick-skulled men of Org and, as she danced, a great golden Guest Cup was brought
in.
Kurd leaned across his father and said to Elric: "The Guest Cup, Lord. It is our custom that our guests
drink from it in friendship."
Elric nodded, annoyed at being disturbed in his watching of the wonderful dance, his eyes fixed on Zarozinia
as she postured and glided. There was silence in the hall.
Kurd handed him the cup and absently he put it to his lips, seeing this Zarozinia danced on to the table
and began to weave along it to where Elric sat. As he took the first sip, Zarozinia cried out and, with her
foot, knocked the cup from his hand. The wine splashed on to Gutheran and Hurd who half rose, startled.
"It was drugged, Elric. They drugged it!"
Hurd lashed at her with his hand, striking her across
the face. She fell from the table and lay moaning
slightly on the filthy floor. "Bitch! Would the messengers
of the Gods be harmed by a little drugged wine"
Enraged, Elric pushed aside Gutheran and struck sav-agely at Hurd so that the young man's mouth
gushed blood. But the drug was already having effect. Gutheran shouted something and Moonglum drew
his sabre, glanc-ing upwards. Elric was swaying, his senses were jumbled and the scene had an unreal
quality. He saw servants grasp Zarozinia but could not see how Moonglum was faring. He felt sick and
dizzy, could hardly control his limbs.
Summoning up his last remaining strength, Elric dubbed Hurd down with one tremendous blow. Then he
collapsed into unconsciousness.
THREE
There was the cold clutch of chains about his wrists and
a thin drizzle was falling directly on to his face which
stung where Hurd's nails had ripped it
He looked about him. He was chained between two stone menhirs upon an obvious burial barrow of
gigan-tic size. It was night and a pale moon hovered in the heavens above him. He looked down at the
group of men below. Hurd and Gutheran were among them. They grinned at him mockingly.
"Farewell, messenger. You will serve us a good pur-pose and placate the Ones from the Hill!" Hurd
called as he and the others scurried back towards the citadel which lay, silhouetted, a short distance
away.
Where was he? What had happened to Zarozinia-and Moonglum? Why had he been chained thus uponreal-isation
and remembrance came-the Hill!
He shuddered, helpless in the strong chains which held him. Desperately he began to tug at them, but
they would not yield. He searched his brain for a plan, but he was confused by torment and worry for his
friends' safety. He heard a dreadful scuttling sound from below and saw a ghastly white shape dart into
the gloom.
Wildly he struggled in the rattling iron which held him,
In the Great Hall of the citadel, a riotous celebration was now reaching the state of an ecstatic orgy.
Gutheran and Hurd were totally drunk, laughing insanely at their victory.
Outside the Hall, Veerkad listened and hated. Particu-larly he hated his brother, the man who had
deposed and blinded him to prevent his study of sorcery by means of which he had planned to raise the
King from Beneath the Hill.
"The time has come, at last," he whispered to himself and stopped a passing servant.
"Tell me-where is the girl kept"
"In Gutheran's chamber, master."
Veerkad released the man and began to grope his way through the gloomy corridors up twisting steps,
until he reached the room he sought. Here he produced a key, one of many he'd had made without
Gutheran's know-ing, and unlocked the door.
Zarozinia saw the blind man enter and could do noth-ing. She was gagged and bound with her own dress
and still dazed from the blow Hurd had given her. They had told her of Elric's fate, but Moonglum had
so far es-caped them, guards hunted him now in the stinking cor-ridors of Org.
"I've come to take you to your companion, lady," smiled blind Veerkad, grasping her roughly with
strength that his insanity had given him, picked her up and fumbled his way towards the door. He knew
the passages of Org perfectly, for he had been born and grown up among them.
But two men were in the corridor outside Gutheran's chambers. One of them was Hurd, Prince of Org,
who resented his father's appropriation of the girl and desired her for himself. He saw Veerkad bearing
the girl away and stood silent while his uncle passed.
The other man was Moonglum, who observed what was happening from the shadows where he had 
hidden from the searching guards. As Hurd followed Veerkad, on cautious feet. Moonglum followed
him.
Veerkad went out of the citadel by a small side door and carried his living burden towards the looming
Burial Hill.
All about the foot of the monstrous barrow swarmed
the leprous-white ghouls who sensed the presence of El-ric, the folk of Org's sacrifice to them.
Now Elric understood.
These were the things that Org feared more than the Gods. These were the living-dead ancestors of those
who now revelled in the Great Hall. Perhaps these were actu-ally the Doomed Folk. Was that their
doom? Never to rest? Never to die? Just to degenerate into mindless ghouls? Elric shuddered.
Now desperation brought back his memory. His voice was an agonised wail to the brooding sky and the
puls-ing earth.
"Arioch! Destroy the stones. Save your servant! Ari-och-master-aid me!"
It was not enough. The ghouls gathered together and began to scuttle, gibbering up the barrow towards
the helpless albino.
"Arioch! These are the things that would forsake your memory! Aid me to destroy them!"
The earth trembled and the sky became overcast, hid-ing the moon but not the white-faced, bloodless
ghouls who were now almost upon him.
And then a ball of fire formed in the sky above him and the very sky seemed to shake and sway around it
Then, with a roaring crash two bolts of lightning slashed down, pulverising the stones and releasing
Elric.
He got to his feet, knowing that Arioch would de-mand his price, as the first ghouls reached him.
He did not retreat, but in his rage and desperation leapt among them, smashing and flailing with the
lengths of chain. The ghouls fell back and fled, gibber-ing in fear and anger, down the hill and into the
bar-row.
Elric could now see that there was a gaping entrance to the barrow below him; black against the
blackness. Breathing heavily, he found that his belt pouch had been left him. From it he took a length of
slim, gold wire and began frantically to pick at the locks of the manacles.
Veerkad chuckled to himself and Zarozinia hearing him was almost mad with terror. He kept drooling
the words into her ear: "When shall the third arise? Only when other dies. When that other's blood flows
red-we'll hear the footfalls of the dead. You and I, we shall resurrect him and such vengeance will he
wreak upon my cursed brother. Your blood, my dear, it will be that released him." He felt that the ghouls
were gone and judged them placated by their feast. "Your lover has been useful to me," he laughed as he
began to enter the barrow. The smell of death almost overpowered the girl as the blind madman bore her
downwards into the heart of the Hill.
Hurd, sobered after his walk in the colder air, was horrified when he saw where Veerkad was going; the
barrow, the Hill of the King, was the most feared spot in the land of Org. Hurd paused before the black
en-trance and turned to run. Then, suddenly, he saw the form of Elric, looming huge and bloody,
descending the barrow slope, cutting off his escape.
With a wild yell he fled into the Hill passage.
Elric had not previously noticed the Prince, but the yell startled him and he tried to see who had given it
but was too late. He began to run down the steep in-cline towards the entrance of the barrow. Another
figure came scampering out of the darkness.
"Elric! Thank the stars and all the Gods of Earth!
You live!"
"Thank Arioch, Moonglum. Where's Zarozinia?"
"In there-the mad minstrel took her with him and Hurd followed. They are all insane, these kings and
princes, I see no sense to their actions."
"I have an idea that the minstrel means Zarozinia no good. Quickly, we must follow."
"By the stars, the stench of death! I have breathed nothing like it-not even at the great battle of the Eshmir
Valley where the armies of Elwher met those of Ka-leg Vogun, usurper prince of the Tanghensi, and
half a million corpses strewed the valley from, end to end."
"If you've no stomach..."
"I wish I had none. It would not be so bad.
Come..."
They rushed into the passage, led by the far away sounds of Veerkad's maniacal laughter and the somewhat
nearer movements of a fear-maddened Kurd who was now trapped between two enemies and yet
more afraid of a third.
Hurd blundered along in the blackness, sobbing to
himself in his terror. __
In the phosphorescent Central Tomb, surrounded by the mummified corpses of his ancestors, Veerkad
chanted the resurrection ritual before the great coffin of the Hill-King-a giant thing, half as tall again as
Veer-kad who was tall enough. Veerkad was forgetful for his own safety and thinking only of vengeance
upon his brother Gutheran. He held a long dagger over Zarozinia who lay huddled and terrified upon the
ground near the coffin.
The spilling of Zarozinia's blood would be the culmi-nation of the ritual and then-Then Hell would, quite
literally, be let loose. Or so Veerkad planned. He finished his chanting and raised the knife just as Hurd
came screeching into the Central Tomb with his own sword drawn. Veerkad swung round, his blind face
working in thwarted rage.
Savagely, without stopping for a moment, Hurd ran his sword into Veerkad's body, plunging the blade in
up to the hilt so that its bloody point appeared sticking from his back. But the other, in his groaning death
spasms, locked his hands about the Prince's throat. Locked them immovably.
Somehow, the two men retained a semblance of life and, struggling with each other in a macabre deathdance,
swayed about the glowing chamber. The coffin of the Hill-King began to tremble and shake
slightly, the movement hardly perceptible.
So Elric and Moonglum found Veerkad and Hurd.
Seeing that both were near dead, Elric raced across the
Central Tomb to where Zarozinia lay, unconscious, mercifully,
from her ordeal. Elric picked her up and made to return.
He glanced at the throbbing coffin.
"Quickly, Moonglum. That blind fool has invoked the dead, I can tell. Hurry, my friend, before the hosts
of Hell are upon us."
Moonglum gasped and followed Elric as he ran back towards the cleaner air of night.
"Where to now, Elric?"
"We'll have to risk going back to the citadel. Our horses are there and our goods. We need the horses to
take us quickly away, for I fear there's going to be a ter-rible blood-letting soon if my instinct is right."
"There should not be too much opposition, Elric They were all drunk when I left That was how I managed
to evade them so easily. By now, if they continued drinking as heavily as when last I saw them,
they'll be unable to move at all."
"Then let's make haste."
The left the Hill behind them and began to run towards the citadel.
FOUR
Moonglum had spoken truth. Everyone was lying about the Great Hall in drunken sleep. Open fires had
been lit in the hearths and they blazed, sending shadows skip-ping around the Hall. Elric said softly:
"Moonglum, go with Zarozinia to the stables and prepare our horses. I will settle our debt with Gutheran
first." He pointed. "See, they have heaped their booty upon the table, gloating in their apparent victory."
Stormbringer lay upon a pile of burst sacks and saddlebags
which contained the loot stolen from Zarozinia's uncle and cousins and from Elric and 
Moonglum.
Zarozinia, now conscious but confused, left with Moonglum to locate the stables and Elric picked his
way towards the table, across the sprawled shapes of drunken men of Org, around the blazing fires and
caught up, thankfully, his hell-forged runeblade.
Then he leaped over the table and was about to grasp Gutheran, who still had his fabulously gemmed
chain of kingship around his neck, when the great doors of the Hall crashed open and a howling blast of
icy air sent the torches dancing and leaping. Elric turned, Gutheran forgotten, and his eyes widened.
Framed in the doorway stood the King from Beneath the Hill.
The long-dead monarch had been raised by Veerkad whose own blood had completed the work of resurrection.
He stood in rotting robes, his fleshless bones covered by tight, tattered skin. His heart did not
beat, for he had none; he drew no breath, for his lungs had been eaten by the creatures which feasted on
such things. But, horribly, he lived ...
The King from the Hill. He had been the last great
ruler of the Doomed Folk who had, in their fury,
destroyed half the Earth and created the Forest of
Troos. Behind the dead King crowded the ghastly hosts
who had been buried with him in a legendary past
The massacre began!
What secret vengeance was being reaped, Elric could only guess at-but whatever the reason, the danger
was still very real.
Elric pulled out Stormbringer as the awakened horde vented their anger upon the living. The Hall
became filled with the shrieking, horrified screams of the unfor-tunate Orgians. Elric remained, halfparalysed
in his horror, beside the throne. Aroused, Gutheran woke up and saw the King from the Hill
and his host. He screamed, almost thankfully:
"At last I can rest!"
And fell dying in a seizure, robbing Elric of his ven-geance.
Veerkad's grim song echoed in Elric's memory. The Three Kings in Darkness-Gutheran, Veerkad and the
King from Beneath the Hill. Now only the last lived-and he had been dead for millennia.
 The King's cold, dead eyes roved the Hall and saw Gutheran sprawled upon his throne, the ancient chain
of office still about his throat. Elric wrenched it off the body and backed away as the King from Beneath
the Hill advanced. And then his back was against a pillar and there were feasting ghouls everywhere
else.
The dead King came nearer and then, with a whis-tling moan which came from the depths of his decaying
body, launched himself at Elric who found himself fighting desperately against the Hill-King's
clawing, abnormal strength, cutting at flesh that neither bled nor suffered pain. Even the sorcerous
runeblade could do nothing against this horror that had no soul to take and no blood to let.
Frantically, Elric slashed and hacked at the Hill-King but ragged nails raked his flesh and teeth snapped
at his throat. And above everything came the almost overpow-ering stench of death as the ghouls,
packing the Great Hall with their horrible shapes, feasted on the living and the dead.
Then Elric heard Moonglum's voice calling and saw him upon the gallery which ran around the Hall. He
held a great oil jar.
"Lure him close to the central fire, Elric. There may be a way to vanquish him. Quickly man, or you're
fin-ished!"
In a frantic burst of energy, the Melnibonean forced the giant king towards the flames. Around them, the
ghouls fed off the remains of their victims, some of whom still lived, their screams calling hopelessly
over the sound of carnage.
The Hill-King now stood, unfeeling, with his back to the leaping central fire. He still slashed at Elric.
Moon-glum hurled the jar.
It shattered upon the stone hearth, spraying the King
with blazing oil. He staggered, and Elric struck with his
full power, the man and the blade combining to push
the Hill-King backwards. Down went the King into the flames and the flames began to devour him.
A dreadful, lost howling came from the burning giant as he perished.
Flames licked everywhere throughout the Great Hall and soon the place was like Hell itself, an inferno of
licking fire through which the ghouls ran about, still feasting, unaware of their destruction. The way to
the door was blocked.
Elric stared around him and saw no way of escape-save one.
Sheathing Stormbringer, he ran a few paces and leaped upwards, just grasping the rail of the gallery as
flames engulfed the spot where he had been standing.
Moonglum reached down and helped him to clamber across the rail.
"I'm disappointed, Elric," he grinned, "you forgot to bring the treasure."
Elric showed him what he grasped in his left hand-the jewel-encrusted chain of kingship.
"This bauble is some reward for our hardships," he smiled, holding up the glittering chain. "I stole
nothing, by Arioch! There are no kings left in Org to wear it! Come let's join Zarozinia and get our
horses."
They ran from the gallery as masonry began to crash downwards into the Great Hall.
They rode fast away from the halls of Org and look-ing back saw great fissures appear in the walls and
heard the roar of destruction as the flames consumed every-thing that had been Org. They destroyed the
seat of the monarchy, the remains of the Three Kings in Darkness, the present and the past. Nothing
would be left of Org save an empty burial mound and two corpses, locked to-gether, lying where their
ancestors had lain for centuries in the Central Tomb. They destroyed the last link with the previous age
and cleansed the Earth of an ancient evil. Only the dreadful Forest of Troos remained to mark the
coming and the passing of the Doomed Folk.
And the Forest of Troos was a warning.
Weary and yet relieved, the three saw the outlines of Troos in the distance, behind the blazing funeral
pyre.
And yet, in his happiness, Elric had a fresh problem on his mind now that danger was past.
"Why do you frown now, love?" asked Zarozinia.
"Because I think you spoke the truth. Remember you said I placed too much reliance on my runeblade
here?"
"Yes-and I said I would not dispute with you."
"Agreed. But I have a feeling that you were partially right. On the burial mound and in it I did not have
Stormbringer with me-and yet I fought and won, be-cause I feared for your safety." His voice was quiet.
"Perhaps, in tune, I can keep my strength by means of certain herbs I found in Troos and dispense with
the blade for ever?"
Moonglum shouted with laughter hearing these words.
"Elric-I never thought I'd witness this. You daring to think of dispensing with that foul weapon of yours.
I don't know if you ever shall, but the thought is comfort-ing."
"It is, my friend, it is." He leaned in his saddle and grasped Zarozinia's shoulders, pulling her
dangerously towards him as they galloped without slackening speed. And as they rode he kissed her,
heedless of their pace.
"A new beginning!" he shouted above the wind. "A new beginning, my love!"
And then they all rode laughing towards Karlaak by the Weeping Waste, to present themselves, to enrich
themselves, and to attend the strangest wedding the Northern Lands had ever witnessed.
BOOK THREE
The Flamebringers
In which Moonglum returns from the East-
lands with disturbing news ..,
ONE
Bloody-beaked hawks soared on the frigid wind. They soared high above a mounted horde inexorably
moving across the Weeping Waste.
The horde had crossed two deserts and three moun-tain ranges to be there and hunger drove them
onwards. They were spurred on by remembrances of stories heard from travellers who had come to their
Eastern home-land, by the encouragements of their thin-lipped leader who swaggered in his saddle ahead
of them, one arm wrapped around a ten-foot lance decorated with the gory trophies of bis pillaging
campaigns.
The riders moved slowly and wearily, unaware that they were nearing their goal.
Far behind the horde, a stocky rider left Elwher, the singing, boisterous capital of the Eastern world, and
came soon to a valley.
The hard skeletons of trees had a blighted look and the horse kicked earth the colour of ashes as its rider
drove it fiercely through the sick wasteland that had once been gentle Eshmir, the golden garden of the
East.
A plague had smitten Eshmir and the locust had stripped her of her beauty. Both plague and locust went
by the same name-Terarn Gashtek, Lord of the Mount-ed Hordes, sunken-faced carrier of destruction;
Terarn Gashtek, insane blood-drawer, the shrieking flame bringer. And that was his other name-Flame
Bringer.
The rider who witnessed the evil that Terarn Gashtek had brought to gentle Eshmir was named
Moonglum.
Moonglum was riding, now, for Karlaak by the Weeping
Waste, the last outpost of the Western civilisation of
which those in the Eastlands knew little. In Karlaak,
Moonglum knew he would find Elric of Melnibone who now dwelt permanently in his wife's graceful
city. Moon-glum was desperate to reach Karlaak quickly, to warn Elric and to solicit his help.
He was small and cocky, with a broad mouth and a shock of red hair, but now his mouth did not grin and
his body was bent over the horse as he pushed it on towards Karlaak. For Eshmir, gentle Eshmir, had
been Moonglum's home province and, with his ancestors, had formed him into what he was.
So, cursing, Moonglum rode for Karlaak.
But so did Terarn Gashtek. And already the Flame Bringer had reached the Weeping Waste. The horde
moved slowly, for they had wagons with them which had at one time dropped far behind but now the
supplies they carried were needed. As well as provisions, one of the wagons carried a bound prisoner
who lay on his back cursing Terarn Gashtek and his slant-eyed battle-mongers.
Drinij Bara was bound by more than strips of leather, that was why he cursed, for Drinij Bara was a
sorcerer who could not normally be held in such a manner. If he had not succumbed to his weakness for
wine and women just before the Flame Bringer had come down on the town in which he was staying, he
would not have been trussed so, and Terarn Gashtek would not now have Drinij Bara's soul.
Drinij Bara's soul reposed in the body of a small, black cat-the cat which Terarn Gashtek had caught and
carried with him always, for, as was the habit of Eastern sorcerers, Drinij Bara had hidden his soul in the
body of the cat for protection. Because of this he was now slave to the Lord of the Mounted Hordes, and
had to obey him lest the man slay the cat and so send his soul to Hell.
It was not a pleasant situation for the proud sorcerer, but he did not deserve less.
There was on the pale face of Elric of Melnibone
some slight trace of an earlier haunting, but his mouth
smiled and his crimson eyes were at peace as he looked
down at the young, black-haired woman with whom he walked in the terraced gardens of Karlaak.
"Elric," said Zarozinia, "have you found your hap-piness?"
He nodded. "I think so. Stormbringer, now hangs amid cobwebs in your father's armoury. The drugs I discovered
in Troos keep me strong, my eyesight clear, and need to be taken only occasionally. I need never
think of travelling or fighting again. I am content, here, to spend my time with you and study the books
in Kar-laak's library. What more would I require?"
"You compliment me overmuch, my lord. I would be-come complacent."
He laughed. "Rather that than you were doubting. Do not fear, Zarozinia, I possess no reason, now, to
jour-ney on. Moonglum, I miss, but it was natural that he should become restless of residence in a city
and wish to revisit his homeland."
"I am glad you are at peace, Elric. My father was at first reluctant to let you live here, fearing the black
evil that once accompanied you, but three months have proved to him that the evil has gone and left no
fuming berserker behind it."
Suddenly there came a shouting from below them, in the street a man's voice was raised and he banged
at the gates of the house.
"Let me in, damn you, I must speak with your mas-ter."
A servant came running: "Lord Elric-there is a man at the gates with a message. He pretends friendship
with you."
"His name?"
"An alien one-Moonglum, he says."
"Moonglum! His stay in Elwher has been short. Let him in!"
Zarozinia's eyes held a trace of fear and she held El-ric's arm fiercely. "Elric-pray he does not bring news
to take you hence."
"No news could do that. Fear not, Zarozinia." He hurried
out of the garden and into the courtyard of the
house. Moonglum rode hurriedly through the gates, dismounting as he did so.
"Moonglum, my friend! Why the haste? Naturally, I am pleased to see you after such a short time, but
you have been riding hastily-why?"
The little Eastlander's face was grim beneath its coating of dust and his clothes were filthy from hard riding.
"The Flame Bringer comes with sorcery to aid him," he panted. "You must warn the city."
"The Flame Bringer? The name means nothing-you sound delirious, my friend."
"Aye, that's true, I am. Delirious with hate. He destroyed my homeland, killed my family, my friends and
now plans conquests in the West. Two years ago he was little more than an ordinary desert raider but
then he began to gather a great horde of barbarians around him and has been looting and slaying his way
across the Eastern lands. Only Elwher has not suffered from his at-tacks, for the city was too great for
even him to take. But he has turned two thousand miles of pleasant coun-try into a burning waste. He
plans world conquest, rides westwards with five hundred thousand warriors!"
"You mentioned sorcery-what does this barbarian know of such sophisticated arts?"
"Little himself, but he has one of our greatest wizards in his power-Drinij Bara. The man was captured as
he lay drunk between two wenches in a tavern in Phum. He had put his soul into the body of a cat so
that no rival sorcerer might steal it while he slept. But Terarn Gashtek, the Flame Bringer, knew of this
trick, seized the cat and bound its legs, eyes and mouth, so imprison-ing Drinij Bara's evil soul. Now the
sorcerer is his slave-if he does not obey the barbarian, the cat will be killed by an iron blade and Drinij
Bara's soul will go to Hell."
"These are unfamiliar sorceries to me," said Elric.
"They seem little more than superstitions."
"Who knows that they may be-but so long as Drinij
Bara believes what he believes, he will do as Terarn
Gashtek dictates. Several proud cities have been de-stroyed with the aid of his magic."
"How far away is this Flame Bringer?"
"Three days' ride at most. I was forced to come hence by a longer route, to avoid his outriders."
"Then we must prepare for a siege."
"No, Elric-you must prepare to flee!"
"To flee-should I request the citizens of Karlaak to leave their beautiful city unprotected, to leave their
homes?"
"If they will not-you must, and take your bride with you. None can stand against such a foe."
"My own sorcery is no mean thing."
"But one man's sorcery is not enough to hold back half a million men also aided by sorcery."
"And Karlaak is a trading city-not a warrior's fortress. Very well, I will speak to the Council of Elders
and try to convince them."
"You must convince them quickly, Elric, for if you do not Karlaak will not stand half a day before
Terarn Gashtek's howling blood-letters."
"They are stubborn," said Elric as the two sat in his private study later that night. "They refuse to realise
the magnitude of the danger. They refuse to leave and I cannot leave them for they have welcomed me
and made me a citizen of Karlaak."
"Then we must stay here and die?"
"Perhaps. There seems to be no choice. But I have an-other plan. You say that this sorcerer is a prisoner
of Terarn Gashtek. What would he do if he regained his soul?"
"Why he would take vengeance upon his captor. But Terarn Gashtek would not be so foolish as to give
him the chance. There is no help for us there."
"What if we managed to aid Drinij Bara?"
"How? It would be impossible."
"It seems our only chance. Does this barbarian know of me or my history?"
"Not as far as I know."
"Would he recognise you?"
"Why should he?"
"Then I suggest we join him."
"Join him-Elric you are no more sane than when we rode as free travellers together!"
"I know what I am doing. It would be the only way to get close to him and discover a subtle way to
defeat him. We will set off at dawn, there is no time to waste."
"Very well. Let's hope your old luck is good, but I doubt it now, for you've forsaken your old ways and
the luck went with them."
"Let us find out."
"Will you take Stormbringer?"
"I had hoped never to have to make use of that hell-forged blade again. She's a treacherous sword at
best."
"Aye-but I think you'll need her in this business."
"Yes, you're right. I'll take her."
Elric frowned, his hands clenched. "It will mean breaking my word to Zarozinia."
"Better break it-than give her up to the Mounted Hordes."
Elric unlocked the door to the armoury, a pitch torch flaring in one hand. He felt sick as he strode down
the narrow passage lined with dulled weapons which had not been used for a century.
His heart pounded heavily as he came to another door and flung off the bar to enter the little room in
which lay the disused regalia of Karlaak's long-dead War Chieftains-and Stormbringer. The black blade
be-gan to moan, as if welcoming him as he took a deep breath of the musty air and reached for the
sword. He clutched the hilt and his body was racked by an unholy sensation of awful ecstasy. His face
twisted as he sheathed the blade and he almost ran from the armoury towards cleaner air.
Elric and Moonglum mounted their plainly equipped horses and, garbed like common mercenaries, bade
ur-gent farewell to the Councillors of Karlaak.
Zarozinia kissed Elric's pale hand.
"I realise the need for this," she said, her eyes full of tears, "but take care, my love."
"I shall. And pray that we are successful in whatever we decide to do."
"The White Gods be with you."
"No-pray to the Lords of the Darks, for it is their evil help I'll need in this work. And forget not my
words to the messenger who is to ride to the south-west and find Dyvim Slorm."
"I'll not forget," she said, "though I worry lest you succumb again to your old black ways."
"Fear for the moment-I'll worry about my own fate later."
"Then farewell, my lord, and be lucky."
"Farewell, Zarozinia. My love for you will give me more power even than this foul blade here." He
spurred his horse through the gates and then they were riding for the Weeping Waste and a troubled
future.
TWO
Dwarfed by the vastness of the softly turfed plateau which was the Weeping Waste, the place of eternal
rains, the two horsemen drove their hard-pressed steeds through the drizzle.
A shivering desert warrior, huddled against the weather, saw them come towards him. He stared through
the rain trying to make out details of the riders, then wheeled his stocky pony and rode swiftly back in
the direction he had come. Within minutes he had reached a larger group of warriors attired like himself
in furs and tasselled iron helmets. They carried short bone bows and quivers of long arrows fletched with
hawk feathers. There were curved scimitars at their sides.
He exchanged a few words with his fellows and soon they were all lashing their horses towards the two
riders.
"How much further lies the camp of Terarn Gashtek, Moonglum?" Elric's words were breathless, for
both men had ridden for a day without halt "Not much further, Elric. We should be-look!" Moonglum
pointed ahead. About ten riders came swiftly towards them. "Desert barbarians-the Flame
Bringer's men. Prepare for a fight-they won't waste time parleying."
Stormbringer scraped from the scabbard and the heavy blade seemed to aid Elric's wrist as he raised it,
so that it felt almost weightless.
Moonglum drew both his swords, holding the short one with the same hand with which he grasped his
horse's reins.
The Eastern warriors spread out in a half circle as they rode down on the companions, yelling wild warshouts.
Elric reared his mount to a savage standstill and met the first rider with Stormbringer's point full
in the man's throat. There was a stink like brimstone as it pierced flesh and the warrior drew a ghastly
choking breath as he died, his eyes staring out in full realisation of his terrible fate-for Stormbringer
drank souls as well as blood.
Elric cut savagely at another desertman, lopping off his sword arm and splitting his crested helmet and
the skull beneath. Rain and sweat ran down his white, taut features and into his glowing crimson eyes,
but he blinked it aside, half-fell in his saddle as he turned to defend himself against another howling
scimitar, parried the sweep, slid his own runeblade down its length, turned the blade with a movement of
his wrist and disarmed the warrior. Then he plunged his sword into the man's heart and the desert warrior
yelled like a wolf at the moon, a long baying shout before Stormbringer took his soul.
Elric's face was twisted in self-loathing as he fought intently with superhuman strength. Moonglum
stayed clear of the albino's sword for he knew its liking for the lives of Elric's friends.
Soon only one opponent was left. Elric disarmed him and had to hold his own greedy sword back from
the man's throat.
Reconciled to the horror of his death, the man said something in a guttural tongue which Elric half-recognised.
He searched his memory and realised that it was a language close to one of the many ancient
tongues which, as a sorcerer, he had been required to learn years before.
He said in the same language: "Thou art one of the warriors of Terarn Gashtek the Flame Bringer."
"That is true. And you must be the White-faced Evil One of legends. I beg you to slay me with a cleaner
weapon than that which you hold."
"I do not wish to kill thee at all. We were coming hence to join Terarn Gashtek. Take us to him."
The man nodded hastily and clambered back on his horse.
"Who are you who speaks the High Tongue of our people?"
"I am called Elric of Melnibone-dost thou know the name?"
The warrior shook his head. "No, but the High Tongue has not been spoken for generations, save by
shamans-yet you're no shaman but, by your dress, seem a warrior."
"We are both mercenaries. But speak no more. I will explain the rest to thy leader."
They left a jackal's feast behind them and followed the quaking Easterner in the direction he led them.
Fairly soon, the low-lying smoke of many camp-fires could be observed and at length they saw the
sprawling camp of the barbarian War Lord's mighty army.
The camp encompassed over a mile of the great plateau. The barbarians had erected skin tents on
rounded frames and the camp had the aspect of a large primitive town. Roughly in the centre was a much
larger construction, decorated with a motley assortment of gaudy silks and brocades.
Moonglum said in the Western tongue: "That must
be Terarn Gashtek's dwelling. See, he has covered its
half-cured hides with a score of Eastern battle-flags." His face grew grimmer as he noted the torn
standard of Esh-mir, the lion-flag of Okara and the blood-soaked pen-nants of sorrowing Changshai.
The captured warrior led them through the squatting ranks of barbarians who stared at them impassively
and muttered to one another. Outside Terarn Gashtek's tasteless dwelling was his great war-lance
decorated with more trophies of his conquests-the skulls and bones of Eastern princes and kings.
Elric said: "Such a one as this must not be allowed to destroy the reborn civilisation of the Young
Kingdoms."
"Young kingdoms are resilient," remarked Moonglum, "but it is when they are old that they fall-and it is
of-ten Terarn Gashtek's kind that tear them down."
"While I live he shall not destroy Karlaak-nor reach as far as Bakshaan."
Moonglum said: "Though, in my opinion, he'd be welcome to Nadsokor. The City of Beggars deserves
such visitors as the Flame Bringer. If we fail, Elric, only the sea will stop him-and perhaps not that."
"With Dyvim Slorm's aid-we shall stop him. Let us
hope Karlaak's messenger finds my kinsman soon,"
"If he does not we shall be hard put to fight off half a million warriors, my friend."
The barbarian shouted: "Oh, Conqueror-mighty Flame Bringer-there are men here who wish to speak
with you."
A slurred voice snarled: "Bring them in."
They entered the badly smelling tent which was lighted by a fire flickering in a circle of stones. A gaunt
man, carelessly dressed in bright captured clothing, lounged on a wooden bench. There were several
women in the tent, one of whom poured wine into a heavy golden goblet which he held out.
Terarn Gashtek pushed the woman aside, knocking her sprawling and regarded the newcomers. His face
was almost as fleshless as the skulls hanging outside his tent. His cheeks were sunken and his slanting
eyes narrow beneath thick brows.
"Who are these?"
"Lord, I know not-but between them they slew ten of our men and would have slain me."
"You deserved no more than death if you let yourself be disarmed. Get out-and find a new sword quickly
or I'll let the shamans have your vitals for divination." The man slunk away.
Terarn Gashtek seated himself upon the bench once more.
"So, you slew ten of my bloodletters, did yon, and came here to boast to me about it? What's the explanation?"
"We but defended ourselves against your warriors-we sought no quarrel with them." Elric now spoke the
cruder tongue as best he could.
"You defended yourselves fairly well, I grant you. We reckon three soft-living house-dwellers to one of
us. You are a Westerner, I can tell that, though your silent friend has the face of an Elwherite. Have you
come from the East or the West?"
"The West," Elric said, "we are free travelling war-riors, hiring our swords to those who'll pay or
promise us good booty."
"Are all Western warriors as skilful as you?" Terarn Gashtek could not hide his sudden realisation that
he might have under-estimated the men he hoped to con-quer.
"We are a little better than most," lied Moonglum, "but not much."
"What of sorcery-is there much strong magic here?"
"No," said Elric, "the art has been lost to most."
The barbarian's thin mouth twisted into a grin, half of relief, half of triumph. He nodded his head,
reached into his gaudy silks and produced a small black and white bound cat. He began to stroke its
back. It wriggled but could do no more than hiss at its captor. "Then we need not worry," he said.
"Now, why did you come here? I could have you tor-tured for days for what you did, slaying ten of my
best outriders."
"We recognised the chance of enriching ourselves by
aiding you, Lord Flame Bringer," said Elric. "We could
show you the richest towns, lead you to ill-defended cit-ies that would take little time to fall. Will you
enlist us?"
"I've need of such men as you, true enough. I'll enlist you readily-but mark this, I'll not trust you until
you've proved loyal to me. Find yourselves quarters now-and come to the feast, tonight. There I'll be able
to show you something of the power I hold-the power which will smash the strength of the West and lay
it waste for ten thousand miles."
"Thanks," said Elric. "I'll look forward to tonight."
They left the tent and wandered through the haphaz-ard collection of tents and cooking fires, wagons and
ani-mals. There seemed little food, but wine was in abun-dance and the taut, hungry stomachs of the
barbarians were placated with that.
They stopped a warrior and told him of Terarn Gashtek's orders to them. The warrior sullenly led them to
a tent.
"Here-it was shared by three of the men you slew. It is yours by right of battle, as are the weapons and
booty inside."
"We're richer already," grinned Elric with feigned de-light.
In the privacy of the tent, which was less clean than Terarn Gashtek's, they debated.
"I feel uncommonly uncomfortable," said Moonglum, "surrounded by this treacherous horde. And every
time I think of what they made of Eshmir, I itch to slay more of them. What now?"
"We can do nothing now-let us wait until tonight and see what develops." Elric sighed. "Our task seems
impossible-I have never seen so great a horde as this."
"They are invincible as they are," said Moonglum.
"Even without Drinij Bara's sorcery to tumble down the
walls of cities, no single nation could withstand them
and, with the Western Nations squabbling among themselves,
they could never unite in time. Civilisation itself
is threatened. Let us pray for inspiration-your dark
gods are at least sophisticated, Elric, and we must hope
that they'll resent the barbarian's intrusion as much as we do."
"They play strange games with their human pawns," Elric replied, "and who knows what they plan?"
Terarn Gashtek's smoke-wreathed tent had been fur-ther lighted by rush torches when Elric and 
Moonglum swaggered in, and the feast, consisting primarily of wine, was already in progress.
"Welcome, my friends," shouted the Flame Bringer, waving his goblet. "These are my captains-come,
join them!"
Elric had never seen such an evil-looking group of barbarians. They were all half-drunk and, like their
leader, had draped a variety of looted articles of cloth-ing about themselves. But their swords were their
own.
Room was made on one of the benches and they ac-cepted wine which they drank sparingly.
"Bring in our slave I" yelled Terarn Gashtek. "Bring in Drinij Bara our pet sorcerer." Before him on the
table lay the bound and struggling cat and beside it an iron blade.
Grinning warriors dragged a morose-faced man close to the fire and forced him to kneel before the
barbarian chief. He was a lean man and he glowered at Terarn Gashtek and the little cat Then his eyes
saw the iron blade and his gaze faltered.
"What do you want with me now?" he said sullenly.
"Is that the way to address your master, spell-maker? Still, no matter. We have guests to entertain-men
who have promised to lead us to fat merchant cities. We re-quire you to do a few minor tricks for them."
"I'm no petty conjurer. You cannot ask this of one of the greatest sorcerers in the world!"
"We do not ask-we order. Come, make the evening lively. What do you need for your magic-making? A
few slaves-the blood of virgins? We shall arrange it."
"I'm no mumbling shaman-I need no such trap-pings."
Suddenly the sorcerer saw Elric. The albino felt the
man's powerful mind tentatively probing his own. He
had been recognised as a fellow sorcerer. Would Drinij Bara betray him?
Elric was tense, waiting to be denounced. He leaned back in his chair and, as he did so, made a sign with
his hand which would be recognised by Western sorcerers-would the Easterner know it?
He did. For a moment he faltered, glancing at the barbarian leader. Then he turned away and began to
make new passes in the air, muttering to himself.
The beholders gasped as a cloud of golden smoke formed near the roof and began to metamorphose into
the shape of a great horse bearing a rider which all recognised as Terarn Gashtek. The barbarian leader
leaned forward, glaring at the image.
"What's this?"
A map showing great land areas and seas seemed to unroll beneath the horse's hooves. "The Western
lands," cried Drinij Bara. "I make a prophecy."
"What is it?"
The ghostly horse began to trample the map. It split and flew into a thousand smoky pieces. Then the
image of the horseman faded, also, into fragments.
"Thus will the mighty Flame Bringer rend the boun-tiful nations of the West," shouted Drinij Bara.
The barbarians cheered exultantly, but Elric smiled thinly. The Eastern wizard was mocking Terarn
Gashtek and his men.
The smoke formed into a golden globe which seemed to blaze and vanish.
Terarn Gashtek laughed. "A good trick, magic-maker-and a true prophecy. You have done your work
well. Take him back to his kennel!"
As Drinij Bara was dragged away, he glanced ques-tioningly at Elric but said nothing.
Later that night, as the barbarians drank themselves into a stupor, Elric and Moonglum slipped out of the
tent and made their way to the place where Drinij Bara was imprisoned.
They reached the small hut and saw that a warrior
stood guard at the entrance. Moonglum produced a skin
of wine and, pretending drunkenness, staggered towards the man. Elric stayed where he was.
"What do you want, Outlander?" growled the guard.
"Nothing my friend, we are trying to get back to our own tent, that's all. Do you know where it is?"
"How should I know?"
"True-how should you? Have some wine-it's good-from Terarn Gashtek's own supply."
The man extended a hand. "Let's have it."
Moonglum took a swig of the wine. "No, I've changed my mind. It's too good to waste on common
warriors."
"Is that so?" The warrior took several paces towards Moonglum. "We'll find out, won't we? And maybe
we'll mix some of your blood with it to give it flavour, my little friend."
Moonglum backed away. The warrior followed.
Elric ran softly towards the tent and ducked into it to find Drinij Bara, wrists bound, lying on a pile of
uncured hides. The sorcerer looked up.
"You-what do you want?"
"We've come to aid you, Drinij Bara."
"Aid me? But why? You're no friend of mine. What would you gain? You risk too much."
"As a fellow sorcerer, I thought I'd help you," Elric said.
"I thought you were that. But, in my land, sorcerers are not so friendly to one another-the opposite, in
fact."
"I'll tell you the truth-we need your aid to halt the barbarian's bloody progress. We have a common
enemy. If we can help you regain your soul, will you help?"
"Help-of course. All I do is plan the way I'll avenge myself. But for my sake be careful-if he suspects
that you're here to aid me, he'll slay the cat and slay us, too."
"We'll try to bring the cat to you. Will that be what you need?"
"Yes. We must exchange blood, the cat and I, and my soul will then pass back into my own body."
"Very well, I'll try to-" Elric turned, hearing voices outside. "What's that?"
The sorcerer replied fearfully. "It must be Terarn Gashtek-he comes every night to taunt me."
"Where's the guard?" The barbarian's harsh voice came closer as he entered the little tent. "What's . . . ?"
He saw Elric standing above the sorcerer.
His eyes were puzzled and wary. "What are you doing here, Westerner-and what have you done with the
guard?"
"Guard?" said Elric, "I saw no guard. I was looking for my own tent and heard this cur cry out, so I
entered. I was curious, anyway, to see such a great sorcerer clad in filthy rags and bound so."
Terarn Gashteck scowled. "Any more of such unwary curiosity my friend, and you'll be discovering what
your own heart looks like. Now, get hence-we ride on in the morning."
Elric pretended to flinch and stumbled hurriedly from the tent.
A lone man in the livery of an Official Messenger of Karlaak goaded his horse southwards. The mount
gal-loped over the crest of a hill and the messenger saw a village ahead. Hurriedly he rode into it,
shouting at the first man he saw.
"Quickly, tell me-know you ought of Dyvim Slorm and his Imrryrian mercenaries? Have they passed
this way?"
"Aye-a week ago. They went towards Rignariom by Jadmar's border, to offer their services to the
Vilmirian Pretender."
"Were they mounted or on foot?"
"Both."
"Thanks, friend," cried the messenger behind him and galloped out of the village in the direction of Rignariom.
The messenger from Karlaak rode through the night-rode along a recently made trail. A large force had
passed that way. He prayed that it had been Dyvim Slorm and his Imrryrian warriors.
In the sweet-smelling garden city of Karlaak, the atmosphere
was tense as the citizens waited for news they knew they could not expect for some time. They
were relying on both Elric and on the messenger. If only one were successful, there would be no hope for 
them. Both had to be successful. Both.
THREE
The tumbling sound of moving men cut through the weeping morning and the hungry voice of Terarn
Gashtek lashed at them to hurry.
Slaves packed up his tent and threw it into a wagon. He rode forward and wrenched his tall war-lance
from the soft earth, wheeled his horse and rode westwards, his captains, Elric and Moonglum among
them, behind him.
Speaking the Western tongue, Elric and Moonglum debated their problem. The barbarian was expecting
them to lead him to his prey, his outriders were cover-ing wide distances so that it would be impossible
to lead him past a settlement. They were in a quandary for it would be disgraceful to sacrifice another
township to give Karlaak a few days' grace, yet...
A little later two whooping outriders came galloping up to Terarn Gashtek.
"A town, lord! A small one and easy to take!"
"At last-this will do to test our blades and see how easy Western flesh is to pierce. Then we'll aim at a
big-ger target." He turned to Elric: "Do you know this town?"
"Where does it lie?" asked Elric thickly.
"A dozen miles to the south-west," replied the outrider.
In spite of the fact that the town was doomed, Elric felt almost relieved. They spoke of the town of
Gorjhan. "I know it," he said.
Cavim the Saddler, riding to deliver a new set of horse furniture to an outlying farm, saw the distant
riders, their bright helmets caught by a sudden beam of sunlight. That the riders came from off the
Weeping Waste was undoubtable-and he recognised menace in their massed progress.
He turned his mount about and rode with the speed of fear, back the way he had come to the town of
Gorjhan.
The flat, hard mud of the street trembled beneath the thudding hooves of Cavim's horse and his high,
excited shout knifed through shuttered windows.
"Raiders come! 'Ware the raiders!"
Within a quarter of an hour, the head-men of the town had met in hasty conference and debated whether
to run or to fight. The older men advised their neigh-bours to flee the raiders, other younger men
preferred to stay ready, armed to meet a possible attack. Some argued that their town was too poor to
attract any raider.
The townspeople of Gorjhan debated and quarrelled, and the first wave of raiders came screaming to
their walls.
With the realisation that there was no time for fur-ther argument came the realisation of their doom, and
they ran to the ramparts with their pitiful weapons.
Terarn Gashtek roared through the milling barbari-ans who churned the mud around Gorjhan: "Let's
waste no time in siege. Fetch the sorcerer!"
They dragged Drinij Bara forward. From his gar-ments, Terarn Gashtek produced the small black cat and
held an iron blade at its throat.
"Work your spell, sorcerer, and tumble the walls quickly."
The sorcerer scowled, his eyes seeking Elric, but the albino averted his own eyes and turned his horse
away.
The sorcerer produced a handful of powder from his
belt pouch and hurled it into the air where it became
first a gas, then a flickering ball of flame and finally a face, a dreadful unhuman face, formed in the
flame.
"Dag-Gadden the Destroyer," intoned Drinij Bara, "you are sworn to our ancient pact-will you obey
me?"
"I must, therefore I will. What do you command?"
"That you obliterate the walls of this town and so leave the men inside naked, like crabs without their
shells."
"My pleasure is to destroy and destroy I shall." The flaming face faded, altered, shrieked a searing course
up-ward and became a blossoming scarlet canopy which hid the sky.
Then it swept down over the town and, in the instant of its passing, the walls of Gorjhan groaned,
crumbled and vanished.
Elric shuddered-if Dag-Gadden came to Karlaak, such would be their fate.
Triumphant, the barbarian battlemongers swept into the defenceless town.
Careful to take no part in the massacre, Elric and Moonglum were also helpless to aid the slaughtered
townspeople. The sight of the senseless, savage blood-shed around them enervated them. They ducked
into a small house which seemed so far untouched by the pil-laging barbarians. Inside they found three
cowering chil-dren huddled around an older girl who clutched an old scythe in her soft hands. Shaking
with fear, she prepared to stand them off.
"Do not waste our time, girl," Elric said, "or you'll be wasting your lives. Does this house have a loft?"
She nodded.
"Then get to it quickly. We'll make sure you're un-harmed."
They stayed in the house, hating to observe the slaughter-madness which had come upon the howling
barbarians. They heard the dreadful sounds of carnage and smelled the stench of dead flesh and running
blood.
A barbarian, covered in blood which was not his own, dragged a woman into the house by her hair. She
made no attempt to resist, her face stunned by the horror she had witnessed.
Elric growled: "Find another nest, hawk-we've made this our own."
The man said: "There's room enough here for what I want."
Then, at last, Elric's clenched muscles reacted almost in spite of him. His right hand swung over to his
left hip and the long fingers locked around Stormbringer's black hilt. The blade leapt from the scabbard
as Elric stepped forward and, his crimson eyes blazing his sick-ened hatred, he smashed his sword down
through the man's body. Unnecessarily, he clove again, hacking the barbarian in two. The woman
remained where she lay, conscious but unmoving.
Elric picked up her inert body and passed it gently to Moonglum. "Take her upstairs with the others," he
said brusquely.
The barbarians had begun to fire part of the town, their slaying all but done. Now they looted. Elric
stepped out of the doorway.
There was precious little for them to loot but, still hungry for violence, they spent their energy on smashing
inanimate things and setting fire to the broken, pil-laged dwellings.
Stormbringer dangled loosely in Elric's hand as he looked at the blazing town. His face was a mask of
shadow and frisking light as the fire threw up still long-er tongues of flame to the misty sky.
Around him, barbarians squabbled over the pitiful booty; and occasionally a woman's scream cut above
the other sounds, intermingled with rough shouts and the clash of metal.
Then he heard voices which were pitched differently to those in the immediate vicinity. The accents of
the reavers mingled with a new tone-a whining, pleading tone. A group led by Terarn Gashtek came into
view through the smoke.
Terarn Gashtek held something bloody in his hand-a human hand, severed at the wrist-and behind him
swaggered several of his captains holding a naked old man between them. Blood ran over his body and
gushed from his ruined arm, spurting sluggishly.
Terarn Gashtek frowned when he saw Elric. Then he shouted: "Now Westerner, you shall see how we
placate our Gods with better gifts than meal and sour milk as this swine once did. He'll soon be dancing a
pretty measure, I'll warrant-won't you, Lord Priest?"
The whining note went out of the old man's voice then and he stared with fever-bright eyes at Elric. His
voice rose to a frenzied and high-pitched shriek which was curiously repellent.
"You dogs can howl over me!" he spat, "but Mirath and T'aargano will be revenged for the ruin of their
priest and their temple-you have brought flame here and you shall die by flame." He pointed the bleeding
stump of his arm at Elric- "And you-you are a traitor and have been one in many causes, I can see it
written in you. Though now ... You are-" the priest drew breath...
Elric licked his lips.
"I am what I am," he said, "And you are nothing but an old man soon to die. Your gods cannot harm us,
for we do not pay them any respect. I'll listen no more to your senile meanderings!"
There was in the old priest's face all the knowledge of his past torment and the torment which was to
come. He seemed to consider this and then was silent.
"Save your breath for screaming," said Terarn Gashtek to the uncomprehending priest.
And then Elric said: "It's bad luck to kill a priest, Flame Bringer!"
"You seem weak of stomach, my friend. His sacrifice to our own gods will bring us good luck, fear not."
Elric turned away. As he entered the house again, a wild shriek of agony seared out of the night and the
laughter which followed was not pleasant.
Later, as the still burning houses lit the night, Elric and Moonglum, carrying heavy sacks on their
shoulders, clasping a woman each, moved with a simulation of drunkenness to the edge of the camp.
Moonglum left the sacks and the women with Elric and went back, re-turning soon with three horses.
They opened the sacks to allow the children to climb
out and watched the silent women mount the horses, aiding the children to clamber up.
Then they galloped away.
"Now," said Elric savagely, "we must work our plan tonight, whether the messenger reached Dyvim
Slorm or not. I could not bear to witness another such sword-quenching."
Terarn Gashtek had drunk himself insensible. He lay sprawled in an upper room of one of the unburned
houses.
Elric and Moonglum crept towards him. While Elric watched to see that he was undisturbed, Moonglum
knelt beside the barbarian leader and, lightfingered, cau-tiously reached inside the man's garments. He
smiled in self-approval as he lifted out the squirming cat and re-placed it with a stuffed rabbit-skin he
had earlier prepared for the purpose. Holding the animal tight, he arose and nodded to Elric. Together,
warily, they left the house and made their way through the chaos of the camp.
"I ascertained that Drinij Bara lies in the large wagon,' Elric told his friend. "Quickly, now, the main
danger's over."
Moonglum said: "When the cat and Drinij Bara have exchanged blood and the sorcerer's soul is back in
his body-what then, Elric?"
"Together, our powers may serve at least to hold the barbarians back, but-" he broke off as a large group
of warriors came weaving towards them.
"It's the Westerner and his little friend," laughed one.
"Where are you off to, comrades?"
Elric sensed their mood. The slaughter of the day had not completely satiated their blood-lust. They were
look-ing for trouble.
"Nowhere in particular," he replied. The barbarians lurched around them, encircling them.
"We've heard much of your straight blade, stranger," grinned their spokesman, "and I'd a mind to test it
against a real weapon." He grabbed his own scimitar out of his belt. "What do you say?"
"I'd spare you that," said Elric coolly.
"You are generous-but I'd rather you accepted my in-vitation."
"Let us pass," said Moonglum.
The barbarians' faces hardened. "Speak you so to the conquerors of the world?" said the leader.
Moonglum took a step back and drew his sword, the cat squirming in his left hand.
"We'd best get this done," said Elric to his friend. He tugged his runeblade from its scabbard. The sword
sang a soft and mocking tune and the barbarians heard it. They were disconcerted.
"Well?" said Elric, holding the half-sentient blade out
The barbarian who had challenged him looked uncer-tain of what to do. Then he forced himself to shout:
"Clean iron can withstand any sorcery," and launched himself forward.
Elric, grateful for the chance to take further ven-geance, blocked his swing, forced the scimitar back and
aimed a blow which sliced the man's torso just above the hip. The barbarian screamed and died.
Moonglum, dealing with a couple more, killed one but another came in swiftly and his sweeping sword
sliced the little Eastlander's left shoulder. He howled-and dropped the cat. Elric stepped in, slew
Moonglum's opponent, Stormbringer wailing a triumphant dirge. The rest of the barbarians turned and
ran off.
"How bad is your wound?" gasped Elric, but Moon-glum was on his knees staring through the gloom.
"Quick, Elric-can you see the cat? I dropped it in the struggle. If we lose it-we too are lost."
Frantically, they began to hunt through the camp.
But they were unsuccessful, for the cat, with the dex-terity of its kind, had hidden itself.
A few moments later they heard the sounds of uproar coming from the house which Terarn Gashtek had
com-mandeered.
"He's discovered that the cat's been stolen!" ex-claimed Moonglum. "What do we do now?"
"I don't know-keep searching and hope he does not suspect us."
They continued to hunt, but with no result. While they searched, several barbarians came up to them.
One of them said:
"Our leader wishes to speak with you."
"Why?"
"He'll inform you of that. Come on."
Reluctantly, they went with the barbarians to be con-fronted by a raging Terarn Gashtek. He clutched the
stuffed rabbit skin in one claw-like hand and his face was warped with fury.
"My hold over the sorcerer has been stolen from me," he roared. "What do you know of it?"
"I don't understand," said Elric.
"The cat is missing-I found this rag in its place. You were caught talking to Drinij Bara recently, I think
you were responsible."
"We know nothing of this," said Moonglum.
Terarn Gashtek growled: "The camp's in disorder, it will take a day to re-organise my men-once loosed
like this they will obey no one. But when I've restored order, I shall question the whole camp. If you tell
the truth, then you will be released, but meanwhile you will be given all the time you need to speak with
the sorcerer." He jerked his head. "Take them away, disarm them, bind them and throw them in Drinij
Bara's kennel."
As they were led away, Elric muttered: "We must es-cape and find that cat, but meanwhile we need not
waste this opportunity to confer with Drinij Bara."
Drinij Bara said in the darkness: "No, Brother Sor-cerer, I will not aid you. I will risk nothing until the
cat and I are united."
"But Terarn Gashtek cannot threaten you any more."
"What if he recaptures the cat-what then?"
Elric was silent. He shifted his bound body uncom-fortably on the hard boards of the wagon. He was
about to continue his attempts at persuasion when the awning was thrown aside and he saw another
trussed figure thrown towards them. Through the blackness he said in the Eastern tongue: "Who are
you?"
The man replied in the language of the West: "I do not understand you."
"Are you, then, a Westerner?" asked Elric in the com-mon speech.
"Yes-I am an Official Messenger from Karlaak. I was captured by these odorous jackals as I returned to
the city."
"What? Are you the man we sent to Dyvim Slorm, my kinsman? I am Elric of Melnibone."
"My lord, are we all, then prisoners? Oh, gods-Kar-laak is truly lost."
"Did you get to Dyvim Slorm?"
"Aye-I caught up with him and his band. Luckily they were nearer to Karlaak than we suspected."
"And what was his answer to my request?"
"He said that a few young ones might be ready, but even with sorcery to aid him it would take some time
to get to the Dragon Isle. There is a chance."
"A chance is all we need-but it will be no good unless we accomplish the rest of our plan. Somehow
Drinij Bara's soul must be regained so that Terarn Gashtek cannot force him to defend the barbarians.
There is one idea I have-a memory of an ancient kin-ship that we of Melnibone had for a being called
Meer-clar. Thank the gods that I discovered those drugs in Troos and I still have my strength. Now, I
must call my sword to me."
He closed his eyes and allowed his mind and body first to relax completely and then concentrate on one
single thing-the sword Stormbringer.
For years the evil symbiosis had existed between man and sword and the old attachments lingered.
He cried: "Stormbringer! Stormbringer, unite with your brother! Come, sweet runeblade, come hellforged
kinslayer, your master needs thee ..."
Outside, it seemed that a wailing wind had suddenly
sprung up. Elric heard shouts of fear and a whistling
sound. Then the covering of the wagon was sliced apart
to let in the starlight and the moaning blade quivered
in the air over his head. He struggled upwards, already
feeling nauseated at what he was about to do, but he
was reconciled that he was not, this time, guided by selfinterest
but by the necessity to save the world from the barbarian menace.
"Give me thy strength, my sword," he groaned as his bound hands grasped the hilt. "Give me thy
strength and let us hope it is for the last time."
The blade writhed in his hands and he felt an awful sensation as its power, the power stolen vampirelike,
from a hundred brave men, flowed into his shuddering body.
He became possessed of a peculiar strength which was not by any means wholly physical. His white face
twisted as he concentrated on controlling the new power and the blade, both of which threatened to
possess him en-tirely. He snapped his bonds and stood up.
Barbarians were even now running towards the wagon. Swiftly he cut the leather ropes binding the others
and, unconscious of the nearing warriors, called a different name.
He spoke a new tongue, an alien tongue which nor-mally he could not remember. It was a language
taught to the Sorcerer Kings of Melnibone, Elric's ancestors, even before the building of Imrryr, the
Dreaming City, over ten thousand years previously.
"Meerclar of the Cats, it is I, your kinsman, Elric of Melnibone, last of the line that made vows of
friendship with you and your people. Do you hear me, Lord of the Cats?"
Far beyond the Earth, dwelling within a world set apart from the physical laws of space and time which
governed the planet, glowing in a deep warmth of blue and amber, a manlike creature stretched itself and
yawned, displaying tiny, pointed teeth. It pressed its head languidly against its furry shoulder-and
listened.
The voice it heard was not that of one of its people, the kind he loved and protected. But he recognised
the language.
He smiled to himself as remembrance came and he
felt the pleasant sensation of fellowship. He remembered
a race which, unlike other humans (whom he disdained)
had shared his qualities-a race which, like him,
loved pleasure, cruelty and sophistication for its own sake. The race of Melniboneans.
Meerclar, Lord of the Cats, Protector of the Feline
Kind, projected himself gracefully towards the source of
the voice,
"How may I aid thee?" he purred.
"We seek one of your folk, Meerclar, who is some-where close to here."
"Yes, I sense him. What do you want of him?"
"Nothing which is his-but he has two souls, one of them not his own."
"That is so-his name is Fiarshern of the great family of Trrechoww. I will call him. He will come to me."
Outside, the barbarians were striving to conquer their fear of the supernatural events taking place in the
wagon. Terarn Gashtek cursed them: "There are five hundred thousand of us and a few of them. Take
them now!"
His warriors began to move cautiously forward.
Fiarshern, the cat, heard a voice which it knew in-stinctively to be that of one which it would be foolish
to disobey. It ran swiftly towards the source of that voice.
"Look-the cat-there it is. Seize it quickly."
Two of Terarn Gashtek's men jumped forward to do his bidding, but the little cat eluded them and leaped
lightly into the wagon.
"Give the human back its soul, Fiarshern," said Meer-clar softly. The cat moved towards its human
master and dug its delicate teeth into the sorcerer's veins.
A moment later Drinij Bara laughed wildly. "My soul is mine again. Thank you, great Cat Lord. Let me
repay you!"
"There is no need," smiled Meerclar mockingly, "and, anyway, I perceive that your soul is already
bartered. Goodbye, Elric of Melnibone. I was pleased to answer your call, though I see that you no
longer follow the an-cient pursuits of your fathers. Still, for the sake of old loyalties I do not begrudge
you this service. Farewell, I go back to a warmer place than this inhospitable one."
The Lord of the Cats faded and returned to the world
of blue and amber warmth where he once more resumed his interrupted sleep.
"Come, Brother Sorcerer," cried Drinij Bara exul-tantly. "Let us take the vengeance which is ours."
He and Elric sprang from the wagon, but the two oth-ers were not quite so quick to respond.
Terarn Gashtek and his men confronted them. Many had bows with long arrows fitted to them.
"Shoot them down swiftly," yelled the Flame Bringer. "Shoot them now before they have time to
summon fur-ther demons!"
A shower of arrows whistled towards them. Drinij Bara smiled, spoke a few words as he moved his
hands almost carelessly. The arrows stopped in midflight, turned back and each uncannily found the
throat of the man who had shot it. Terarn Gashtek gasped and wheeled back, pushing past his men and,
as he retreated, shouted for them to attack the four.
Driven by the knowledge that if they fled they would be doomed, the great mass of barbarians closed in.
Dawn was bringing light to the cloud-ripped sky as Moonglum looked upwards. "Look, Elric," he
shouted pointing.
"Only five," said the albino. "Only five-but perhaps enough."
He parried several lashing blades on his own sword and, although he was possessed of superhuman
strength, all the power seemed to have left the sword so that it was only as useful as an ordinary blade.
Still fighting, he relaxed his body and felt the power leave him, flowing back into Stormbringer.
Again the runeblade began to whine and thirstily sought the throats and hearts of the savage barbarians.
Drinij Bara had no sword, but he did not need one, he was using subtler means to defend himself. All
around him were the gruesome results, boneless masses of flesh and sinew.
The two sorcerers and Moonglum and the messenger
forced their way through the half-insane barbarians who
were desperately attempting to overcome them. In the
confusion it was impossible to work out a coherent plan
of action. Moonglum and the messenger grabbed scimi-tars from the corpses of the barbarians and joined
in the battle.
Eventually, they had reached the outer limits of the camp. A whole mass of barbarians had fled, spurring
their mounts westwards. Then Elric saw Terarn Gashtek, holding a bow. He saw the Flame Bringer's intention
and shouted a warning to his fellow sorcerer who had his back to the barbarian. Drinij Bara,
yelling some disturbing incantation, half-turned, broke off, at-tempted to begin another spell, but the
arrow pierced his eye.
He screamed: "No!"
Then he died.
Seeing his ally slain, Elric paused and stared at the sky and the great wheeling beasts which he
recognised.
Dyvim Slorm, son of Elric's cousin Dyvim Tvar the Dragon Master, had brought the legendary dragons
of Imrryr to aid his kinsman. But most of the huge beasts slept, and would sleep for another century-only
five dragons had been aroused. As yet, Dyvim Slorm could do nothing for fear of harming Elric and his
comrades.
Terarn Gashtek, too, had seen the magnificent beasts. His grandiose plans of conquest were already
fading and, thwarted, he ran towards Elric.
"You white-faced filth," he howled, "you have been re-sponsible for all this-and you will pay the Flame
Bringer's price!"
Elric laughed as he brought up Stormbringer to pro-tect himself from the incensed barbarian. He pointed
to the sky: "These, too, can be called Flame Bringers, Ter-arn Gashtek-and are better named than thou!"
Then he plunged the evil blade full into Terarn Gashtek's body and the barbarian gave a choking moan as
his soul was drawn from him.
"Destroyer, I may be, Elric of Melnibone," he gasped, "but my way was cleaner than yours. May you and
all you hold dear be cursed for eternity!"
Elric laughed, but his voice shook slightly as he stared
at the barbarian's corpse. "I've rid myself of such curses
once before, my friend. Yours will have little effect, I
think." He paused. "By Arioch, I hope I'm right. I'd thought my fate cleansed of doom and curses, but perhaps
I was wrong...."
The huge horde of barbarians were nearly all mount-ed now and fleeing westwards. They had to be
stopped for, at the pace they were travelling, they would soon reach Karlaak and only the Gods knew
what they would do when they got to the unprotected city.
Above him, he heard the flapping of thirty-foot wings and scented the familiar smell of the great flying
reptiles which had pursued him years before when he had led a reaver fleet on the attack of his homecity.
Then he heard the curious notes of the Dragon Horn and saw that Dyvim Slorm was seated on the
back of the leading beast, a long spearlike goad in his gauntleted right hand.
The dragon spiralled downward and its great bulk came to rest on the ground thirty feet away, its
leathery wings folding back along its length. The Dragon Master waved to Elric.
"Greetings, King Elric, we barely managed to arrive in time I see."
"Time enough, kinsman," smiled Elric. "It is good to see the son of Dyvim Tvar again. I was afraid you
might not answer my plea."
"Old scores were forgotten at the Battle of Bakshaan when my father Dyvim Tvar died aiding you in the
siege of Nikorn's fortress. I regret only the younger beasts were ready to be awakened. You'll remember
the others were used but a few years past."
"I remember," said Elric. "May I beg another favour Dyvim Slorm?"
"What is that?"
"Let me ride the chief dragon. I am trained in the arts of the Dragon Master and have good reason for riding
against the barbarians-we were forced to witness in-sensate carnage a while ago and may, perhaps,
pay them back in their own coinage."
Dyvim Slorm nodded and swung off his mount. The
beast stirred restlessly and drew back the lips of its tapering
snout to reveal teeth as thick as a man's arm, as long as a sword. Its forked tongue flickered and it
turned its huge, cold eyes to regard Elric.
Elric sang to it in the old Melnibonean speech, took the goad and the Dragon Horn from Dyvim Slorm
and carefully climbed into the high saddle at the base of the dragon's neck. He placed his booted feet into
the great silver stirrups.
"Now, fly, dragon brother," he sang, "up, up and have your venom ready."
He heard the snap of displaced air as the wings began to beat and then the great beast was clear of the
ground and soaring upwards into the grey and brooding sky.
The other four dragons followed the first and, as he gained height, sounding specific notes on the horn to
give them directions, he drew his sword from its scab-bard.
Centuries before, Elric's ancestors had ridden their dragon steeds to conquer the whole of the Western
World. There had been many more dragons in the Dragon Caves in those days. Now only a handful remained,
and of those only the youngest had slept suffi-ciently long enough to be awakened.
High in the wintry sky climbed the huge reptiles and Elric's long white hair and stained black cloak flew
be-hind him as he sang the exultant Song of the Dragon Masters and urged his charges westwards.
Wild wind-horses soar the cloud-trails,
Unholy horn doth sound its blast,
You and we were first to conquer,
You and we shall be the last!
Thoughts of love, of peace, of vengeance even were lost in that reckless sweeping across the glowering
skies which hung over that ancient Age of the Young King-doms. Elric, archetypal, proud and disdainful
in his knowledge that even his deficient blood was the blood of the Sorcerer Kings of Melnibone,
became detached.
He had no loyalties then, no friends and, if evil
possessed him, then it was a pure, brilliant evil, untaint-ed by human drivings.
High soared the dragons until below them was the heaving black mass, marring the landscape, the feardriven
horde of barbarians who, in their ignorance, had sought to conquer the lands beloved of Elric of
Melni-bone.
"Ho, dragon brothers-loose your venom-burn-burn!
And in your burning cleanse the world!"
Stormbringer joined in the wild shout and, diving, the dragons swept across the sky, down upon the
crazed bar-barians, shooting streams of combustible venom which water could not extinguish, and the
stink of charred flesh drifted upwards through the smoke and flame so that the scene became a scene of
Hell-and proud Elric was a Lord of Demons reaping awful vengeance.
He did not gloat, for he had done only what was needed, that was all. He shouted no more but turned his
dragon mount back and upward, sounding his horn and summoning the other reptiles to him. And as he
climbed, the exultation left him and was replaced by cold horror.
"I am still a Melnibonean," He thought, "and cannot rid myself of what else I do. And, in my strength I
am still weak, ready to use this cursed blade in any small emergency." With a shout of loathing, he flung
the sword away, flung it into space. It screamed like a woman and went plummeting downwards towards
the distant earth.
"There," he said, "It is done at last." Then, in calmer mood, he returned to where he had left his friends
and guided his reptilian mount to the ground.
Dyvim Slorm said: "Where is the sword of your fore-fathers, King Elric?" But the albino did not answer,
just thanked his kinsman for the loan of the dragon leader. Then they all remounted the dragons and
flew back towards Karlaak to tell them the news.
Zarozinia saw her lord riding the first dragon and
knew that Karlaak and the Western World were saved,
the Eastern World avenged. His stance was proud but
his face was grave as he went to meet her outside the
city. She saw in him a return of an earlier sorrow which he had thought forgotten. She ran to him and he
caught her in his arms, holding her close but saying nothing.
He bade farewell to Dyvim Slorm and his fellow Imrryrians and, with Moonglum and the messenger following
at a distance, went into the city and thence to his house, impatient of the congratulations which
the cit-izens showered upon him.
"What is it, my lord?" Zarozinia said as, with a sigh, he sprawled wearily upon the great bed. "Can
speaking help?"
"I'm tired of swords and sorcery, Zarozinia, that is all. But at last I have rid myself once and for all of
that hell-blade which I had thought my destiny to carry al-ways."
"Stormbringer you mean?"
"What else?"
She said nothing. She did not tell him of the sword which, apparently of its own volition, had come
scream-ing into Karlaak and passed into the armoury to hang, in its old place, in darkness there.
He closed his eyes and drew a long, sighing breath.
"Sleep well, my lord," she said softly. With tearful eyes and a sad mouth she lay herself down beside
him.
She did not welcome the morning.
EPILOGUE
To Rescue Tanelorn ...
In which we learn of the further adventures of Rackhir the Red Archer and other heroes and places Elric
has hitherto encountered only in what he chooses to consider, his dreams . . .
Epilogue
TO RESCUE TANELORN ...
Beyond the tall and ominous glass-green forest of Troos, well to the North and unheard of in Bakshaan,
Elwher or any other city of the Young Kingdoms, on the shift-ing shores of the Sighing Desert lay
Tanelorn, a lonely, long-ago city, loved by those it sheltered.
Tanelorn had a peculiar nature in that it welcomed and held the wanderer. To its peaceful streets and low
houses came the gaunt, the savage, the brutalised, the tormented, and in Tanelorn they found rest.
Now, most of these troubled travellers who dwelt in peaceful Tanelorn had thrown off earlier allegiances
to the Lords of Chaos who, as gods, took more than a mild interest in the affairs of men. It happened,
therefore, that these same Lords grew to resent the unlikely city of Tanelorn and, not for the the first time
decided to act against it.
They instructed one of their number (more they could not, then, send) Lord Narjhan, to journey to
Nadsokor, the City of Beggars, which had an old grudge against Tanelorn and raise an army that would
attack undefend-ed Tanelorn and destroy it and its inhabitants. So he did this, arming his ragged army
and promising them many things.
Then, like a ferocious tide, did the beggar rabble set
off to tear down Tanelorn and slay its residents. A great
torrent of men and women in rags, on crutches, blind,
maimed, but moving steadily, ominously, implacably
Northwards towards the Sighing Desert
In Tanelorn dwelt the Red Archer, Rackhir, from the
Eastlands beyond the Sighing Desert, beyond the Weeping
Waste. Rackhir had been born a Warrior Priest, a servant of the Lords of Chaos, but had forsaken this
life for the quieter pursuits of thievery and learning. A man with harsh features slashed from the bone of
his skull, strong, fleshless nose, deep eye-cavities, a thin mouth and a thin beard. He wore a red skullcap,
decorated with a hawk's feather, a red jerkin, tight-fitting and belted at the waist, red breeks, and red
boots. It was as if all the blood in him had transferred itself to his gear and left him drained. He was
happy, however, in Tane-lorn, the city which made all such men happy, and felt he would die there if
men died there. He did not know if they did.
One day he saw Brut of Lashmar, a great, blond-headed noble of shamed name, ride wearily, yet urgently,
through the low wall-gate of the city of peace. Brut's silver harness and trappings were
begrimed, his yellow cloak torn and his broad-brimmed hat battered. A small crowd collected around
him as he rode into the city square and halted. Then he gave his news.
"Beggars from Nadsokor, many thousands, move against our Tanelorn," he said, "and they are led by
Narjhan of Chaos."
Now, all the men in there were soldiers of some kind, good ones for the most part, and they were
confident warriors, but few in number. A horde of beggars, led by such a being as Narjhan, could destroy
Tanelorn, they knew.
"Should we, then, leave Tanelorn?" said Uroch of Nieva, a young, wasted man who had been a drunkard.
"We owe this city too much to desert her," Rackhir said. "We should defend her-for her sake and ours.
There will never be such a city again."
Brut leaned forward in his saddle and said: "In prin-ciple, Red Archer, I am in agreement with you. But
principle is not enough without deeds. How would you suggest we defend this low-walled city against
siege and the powers of Chaos?"
"We should need help," Rackhir replied, "supernatu-ral help if need be."
"Would the Grey Lords help us?" Zas the One-handed asked the question. He was an old, torn wanderer
who had once gained a throne and lost it again.
"Aye-the Grey Lords!" Several voices chorused this hopefully.
"Who are the Grey Lords?" said Uroch, but no one heard him.
"They are not inclined to aid anyone at all," Zas the One-handed pointed out, "but surely Tanelorn,
coming as it does under neither the Forces of Law nor the Lords of Chaos, would be worth their while
preserving. After all, they have no loyalties either."
"I'm for seeking the Grey Lords' aid," Brut nodded. "What of the rest of us?" There was general
agreement, then silence when they realised that they knew of no means of contacting the mysterious and
insouciant beings. At last Zas pointed this out.
Rackhir said: "I know a seer-a hermit who lives in the Sighing Desert. Perhaps he can help?"
"I think that, after all, we should not waste time look-ing for supernatural assistance against this beggar
rabble," Uroch said. "Let us prepare, instead, to meet the attack with physical means."
"You forget," Brut said wearily, "that they are led by Narjhan of Chaos. He is not human and has the
whole strength of Chaos behind him. We know that the Grey Lords are pledged neither to Law nor to
Chaos but will sometimes help either side if the whim takes them. They are our only chance."
"Why not seek the aid of the Forces of Law, sworn en-emies of Chaos and mightier than the Grey
Lords?" Uroch said.
"Because Tanelorn is a city owing allegiance to nei-ther side. We are all of us men and women who have
broken our pledge to Chaos but have made no new one to Law. The Forces of Law, in matters of this
kind, will help only those sworn to them. The Grey Lords only may protect us, if they would." So said
Zas.
"I will go to find my seer," Rackhir the Red Archer
said, "and if he knows how I may reach the Domain of
the Grey Lords, then I'll continue straight on, for there is so little time. If I reach them and solicit their
help you will soon know I have done so. If not, you must die in Tanelorn's defence and, if I live, I will
join you in that last battle."
"Very well," Brut agreed, "go quickly, Red Archer. Let one of your own arrows be the measure of your
speed."
And taking little with him save his bone bow and quiver of scarlet-fletched arrows, Rackhir set off for
the Sighing Desert.
From Nadsokor, South West through the land of Vil-mir, even through the squalid country of Org which
has in it the dreadful forest of Troos, there was flame and black horror in the wake of the beggar horde,
and inso-lent, disdainful of them though he led them, rode a being completely clad in black armour with
a voice that rang hollow in the helm. People fled away at their ap-proach and the land was made barren
by their passing. Most knew what had happened, that the beggar citizens of Nadsokor had, contrary to
their traditions of cen-turies, vomited from their city in a wild, menacing horde. Someone had armed
them-someone had made them go Northwards and Westwards towards the Sighing Desert. But who was
the one who led them? Ordinary folk did not know. And why did they head for the Sigh-ing Desert?
There was no city beyond Karlaak, which they had skirted, only the Signing Desert-and beyond that the
edge of the world. Was that their destination? Were they heading, lemming-like, to their destruction?
Everyone hoped so, in their hate for the horrible horde.
Rackhir rode through the mournful wind of the Sigh-ing Desert, his face and eyes protected against the
parti-cles of sand which flew about. He was thirsty and had been riding a day. Ahead of him at last were
the rocks he sought.
He reached the rocks and called above the wind.
"Lamsar!"
The hermit came out in answer to Rackhir's shout
He was dressed in oiled leather to which sand clung. His beard, too, was encrusted with sand and his skin
seemed to have taken on the colour and texture of the desert. He recognised Rackhir immediately, by his
dress, beck-oned him into the cave, and disappeared back inside. Rackhir dismounted and led his horse
to the cave en-trance and went in.
Lamsar was seated on a smooth rock. "You are wel-come, Red Archer," he said, "and I perceive by your
manner that you wish information from me and that your mission is urgent."
"I seek the help of the Grey Lords, Lamsar," said Rackhir.
The old hermit smiled. It was as if a fissure had sud-denly appeared in a rock. "To risk the journey
through the Five Gates, your mission must be important. I will tell you how to reach the Grey Lords, but
the road is a difficult one."
"I'm willing to take it," Rackhir replied, "for Tane-lorn is threatened and the Grey Lords could help her."
"Then you must pass through the First Gate, which lies in our own dimension. I will help you find it."
"And what must I do then?"
"You must pass through all five gates. Each gateway leads to a realm which lies beyond and within our
own dimension. In each realm you must speak with the dwell-ers there. Some are friendly to men, some
are not, but all must answer your question; "Where lies the next Gate?" though some may seek to stop
you passing. The last gate leads to the Grey Lords' Domain."
"And the first gate?"
"That lies anywhere in this realm. I will find it for you now."
Lamsar composed himself to meditate and Rackhir, who had expected some sort of gaudy miracleworking
from the old man, was disappointed.
Several hours went by until Lamsar said: "The gate is
outside. Memorise the following: If X is equal to the
spirit of humanity, then the combination of the two
must be of double power, therefore the spirit of human-ity always contains the power to dominate itself."
"A strange equation," said Rackhir.
"Aye-but memorise it, meditate upon it and then we will leave."
"We-you as well?"
"I think so."
The hermit was old. Rackhir did not want him on the journey. But then he realised that the hermit's
knowledge could be of use to him, so did not object. He thought upon the equation and, as he thought,
his mind seemed to glitter and become diffused until he was in a strange trance and all his powers felt
greater, both those of mind and body. The hermit got up and Rackhir fol-lowed him. They went out of
the cave-mouth but, in-stead of the Sighing Desert, there was a hazy cloud of blue shimmering light
ahead and when they had passed through this, in a second, they found themselves in the foothills of a
low mountain-range and below them, in a valley, were villages. The villages were strangely laid out, all
the houses in a wide circle about a huge am-phitheatre containing, at its centre, a circular dais.
"It will be interesting to learn the reason why these villages are so arranged," Lamsar said, and they
began to move down into the valley.
As they reached the bottom and came close to one of the villages, people came gaily out and danced
joyfully towards them. They stopped in front of Rackhir and Lamsar and, jumping from foot to foot as he
greeted them, the leader spoke.
"You are strangers, we can tell-and you are welcome to all we have, food, accommodation, and entertainment."
The two men thanked them graciously and accompa-nied them back to the circular village. The amphitheatre
was made of mud and seemed to have been stamped out, hollowed into, the ground encompassed by
the houses. The leader of the villagers took them to his house and offered them food.
"You have come to us at a Rest Time," he said, "but
do not worry, things will soon commence again. My name is Yerleroo."
"We seek the next Gate," Lamsar said politely, "and our mission is urgent. You will forgive us if we do
not stay long?"
"Come," said Yerleroo, "things are about to com-mence. You will see us at our best, and must join us."
All the villagers had assembled in the amphitheatre, surrounding the platform in the centre. Most of them
were light-skinned and light-haired, gay and smiling, ex-cited-but a few were evidently of a different
race, dark, black-haired, and these were sullen.
Sensing something ominous in what he saw, Rackhir asked the question directly: "Where is the next
Gate?"
Yerleroo hesitated, his mouth worked and then he smiled. "Where the winds meet," he said.
Rackhir declared angrily: "That's no answer."
"Yes it is," said Lamsar softly behind him. "A fair an-swer."
"Now we shall dance," Yerleroo said. "First you shall watch our dance and then you shall join in."
"Dance?" said Rackhir, wishing he had brought a sword, or at least a dagger.
"Yes-you will like it. Everyone likes it. You will find it will do you good."
"What if we do not wish to dance?"
"You must-it is for your own good, be assured."
"And he-" Rackhir pointed at one of the sullen men. "Does he enjoy it?"
"It is for his own good."
Yerleroo clapped his hands and at once the fair-haired people leapt into a frenetic, senseless dance. Some
of them sang. The sullen people did not sing. After a little hesitation, they began to prance dully about,
their frowning features contrasting with their jerking bodies. Soon the whole village was dancing,
whirling, singing a monotonous song.
Yerleroo flashed by, whirling. "Come, join in now."
"We had better leave," Lamsar said with a faint smile.
They backed away.
Yerleroo saw them. "No-you must not leave-you must dance."
They turned and ran as fast as the old man could go. The dancing villagers changed the direction of their
dance and began to whirl menacingly towards them in a horrible semblance of gaiety.
"There's nothing for it," Lamsar said and stood his ground, observing them through ironic eyes. "The
mountain gods must be invoked. A pity, for sorcery wea-ries me. Let us hope their magic extends to this
plane. Gordar!"
Words in an unusually harsh language issued from Lamsar's old mouth. The whirling villagers came on.
Lamsar pointed at them.
The villagers became suddenly petrified and slowly, disturbingly, their bodies caught in a hundred
positions, turned to smooth, black basalt.
"It was for their own good," Lamsar smiled grimly. "Come, to the place where the winds meet," and he
took Rackhir there quite swiftly.
At the place where the winds met they found the sec-ond gateway, a column of amber-coloured flame,
shot through with streaks of green. They entered it and, in-stantly, were in a world of dark, seething
colour. Above them was a sky of murky red in which other colours shifted, agitated, changing. Ahead of
them lay a forest, dark, blue, black, heavy, mottled green, the tops of its trees moving like a wild tide. It
was a howling land of unnatural phenomena.
Lamsar pursed his lips. "On this plane Chaos rules, we must get to the next gate swiftly for obviously the
Lords of Chaos will seek to stop us."
"Is it always like this?" Rackhir gasped.
"It is always boiling midnight-but the rest, it changes with the moods of the Lords. There are no rules at
all."
They pressed on through the bounding, blossoming scenery as it erupted and changed around them. Once
they saw a huge winged figure in the sky, smoky yellow, and roughly man-shaped.
"Vezhan," Lamsar said, "let's hope he did not see us."
"Vezhan!" Rackhir whispered the name-for it was to Vezhan that he had once been loyal.
They crept on, uncertain of their direction or even of their speed in that disturbing land.
At length, they came to the shores of a peculiar ocean.
It was a grey, heaving, timeless sea, a mysterious sea which stretched into infinity. There could be no
other shores beyond this rolling plain of water. No other lands or rivers or dark, cool woods, no other
men or women or ships. It was a sea which led to nowhere. It was com-plete to itself-a sea.
Over this timeless ocean hovered a brooding ochre sun which cast moody shadows of black and green
across the water, giving the whole scene something of the look of being enclosed in a vast cavern, for the
sky above was gnarled and black with ancient clouds. And all the while the doom-carried crash of
breakers, the lonely, fated monotony of the ever-rearing white-topped waves; the sound which portended
neither death nor life nor war nor peace-simply existence and shifting inharmony. They could go no
further.
"This has the air of our death about it," Rackhir said shivering.
The sea roared and tumbled, the sound of it increas-ing to a fury, daring them to go on towards it,
welcom-ing them with wild temptation-offering them nothing but achievement-the achievement of death.
Lamsar said: "It is not my fate wholly to perish." But then they were running back towards the forest,
feeling that the strange sea was pouring up the beach towards them. They looked back and saw that it
had gone no further, that the breakers were less wild, the sea more calm. Lamsar was little way behind
Rackhir.
The Red Archer gripped his hand and hauled him towards him as if he had rescued the old man from a
whirlpool. They remained there, mesmerised, for a long time, while the sea called to them and the wind
was a cold caress on their flesh.
In the bleak brightness of the alien shore, under a sun which gave no heat, their bodies shone like stars in
the night and they turned towards the forest, quietly.
"Are we trapped, then, in this Realm of Chaos?" Rackhir said at length. "If we meet someone, they will
offer us harm-how can we ask our question?"
Then there emerged from the huge forest a great fig-ure, naked and gnarled like the trunk of a tree, green
as lime, but the face was jovial.
"Greetings, unhappy renegades," it said.
"Where is the next gate?" said Lamsar quickly.
"You almost entered it, but turned away," laughed the giant. "That sea does not exist-it is there to stop
travellers from passing through the gate."
"It exists here, in the Realm of Chaos," Rackhir said thickly.
"You could say so-but what exists in Chaos save the disorders of the minds of gods gone mad?"
Rackhir had strung his bone bow and fitted an arrow to the string, but he did it in the knowledge of his
own hopelessness.
"Do not shoot the arrow," said Lamsar softly. "Not yet." And he stared at the arrow and muttered.
The giant advanced carelessly towards them, unhur-ried.
"It will please me to exact the price of your crimes from you," it said, "for I am Hionhurn the
Executioner. You will find your death pleasant-but your fate unbear-able." And he came closer, his
clawed hands out-stretched.
"Shoot!" croaked Lamsar and Rackhir brought the bow-string to his cheek, pulled it back with might and
released the arrow at the giant's heart. "Run!" cried Lamsar, and in spite of their forebodings they ran
back down the shore towards the frightful sea. They heard the giant groan behind them as they reached
the edge of the sea and, instead of running into water, found them-selves in a range of stark mountains.
"No mortal arrow could have delayed him," Rackhir said. "How did you stop him?"
"I used an old charm-the Charm of Justice, which,
when applied to any weapon, makes it strike at the unjust."
"But why did it hurt Hionhurn, an immortal?" Rack-hir asked.
"There is no justice in the world of Chaos-something constant and inflexible, whatever its nature, must
harm any servant of the Lords of Chaos."
"We have passed through the third gate," Rackhir said, unstringing his bow, "and have the fourth and
fifth to find. Two dangers have been avoided-but what new ones will we encounter now?"
"Who knows?" said Lamsar, and they walked on through the rocky mountain pass and entered a forest
that was cool, even though the sun had reached its ze-nith and was glaring down through parts of the
thick fo-liage. There was an air of ancient calm about the place. They heard unfamiliar bird-calls and
saw tiny golden birds which were also new to them.
"There is something calm and peaceful about this place-I almost distrust it," Rackhir said, but Lamsar
pointed ahead silently.
Rackhir saw a large domed building, magnificent in marble and blue mosaic. It stood in a clearing of
yellow grass and the marble caught the sun, flashing like fire.
They neared the domed construction and saw that it was supported by big marble columns set into a platform
of milky jade. In the centre of the platform, a stairway of blue-stone curved upwards and
disappeared into a circular aperture. There were wide windows set into the sides of the raised building
but they could not see inside. There were no inhabitants visible and it would have seemed strange to the
pair if there had been. They crossed the yellow glade and stepped on to the jade platform. It was warm,
as if it had been ex-posed to the sun. They almost slipped on the smooth stone.
They reached the blue steps and mounted them, staring
upwards, but they could still see nothing. They did
not attempt to ask themselves why they were so assuredly
invading the building; it seemed quite natural
that they should do what they were doing. There was no
alternative. There was an air of familiarity about the place. Rackhir felt it but did not know why. Inside 
was a cool, shadowy hall, a blend of soft darkness and bright sunlight which entered by the windows.
The floor was pearl-pink and the ceiling deep scarlet. The hall re-minded Rackhir of a womb.
Partially hidden by deep shadow was a small doorway and beyond it, steps. Rackhir looked
questioningly at Lamsar. "Do we proceed in our exploration?"
"We must-to have our question answered, if possible."
They climbed the steps and found themselves in a smaller hall similar to the one beneath them. This hall,
however, was furnished with twelve wide thrones placed in a semicircle in the centre. Against the wall,
near the door, were several chairs, upholstered in purple fabric. The thrones were of gold, decorated
with fine silver, padded with white cloth.
A door behind the throne opened and a tall, fragile-looking man appeared, followed by others whose
faces were almost identical. Only their robes were noticeably different. Their faces were pale, almost
white, their noses straight, their lips thin but not cruel. Their eyes were unhuman-green-flecked eyes
which stared out-wards with sad composure. The leader of the tall men looked at Rackhir and Lamsar.
He nodded and waved a pale, long-fingered hand gracefully.
"Welcome," he said. His voice was high and frail, like a girl's, but beautiful in its modulation. The other
eleven men seated themselves in the thrones but the first man, who had spoken, remained standing. "Sit
down, please," he said.
Rackhir and Lamsar sat down on two of the purple chairs.
"How did you come here?" enquired the man.
"Through the gates from Chaos," Lamsar replied.
"And were you seeking our realm?"
"No-we travel towards the Domain of the Grey Lords."
"I thought so, for your people rarely visit us save by
accident"
"Where are we?" asked Rackhir as the man seated himself in the remaining throne.
"In a place beyond time. Once our land was part of the earth you know, but in the dim past it became separated
from it. Our bodies, unlike yours, are immortal. We choose this, but we are not bound to our
flesh, as you are."
"I don't understand," frowned Rackhir. "What are you saying?"
"I have said what I can in the simplest terms under-standable to you. If you do not know what I say then
I can explain no further. We are called the Guardians-though we guard nothing. We are warriors, but we
fight nothing."
"What else do you do?" enquired Rackhir.
"We exist. You will want to know where the next gateway lies?"
"Yes."
"Refresh yourselves here, and then we shall show you the gateway."
"What is your function?" asked Rackhir.
"To function," said the man.
"You are unhuman!"
"We are human. You spend your lives chasing that which is within you and that which you can find in
any other human being-but you will not look for it there-you must follow more glamorous paths-to waste
your time in order to discover that you have wasted your time. I am glad that we are no longer like youbut
I wish that it were lawful to help you further. This, how-ever, we may not do."
"Ours is no meaningless quest," said Lamsar quietly, with respect. "We go to rescue Tanelorn."
"Tanelorn?" the man said softly. "Does Tanelorn still remain?"
"Aye," said Rackhir, "and shelters tired men who are
grateful for the rest she offers." Now he realised why the
building had been familiar-it had the same quality, but intensified, as Tanelorn.
"Tanelorn was the last of our cities," said the Guardian. "Forgive us for judging you-most of the trav-
ellers who pass through this plane are searchers, restless, with no real purpose, only excuses, imaginary
reasons for journeying on. You must love Tanelorn to brave the dangers of the gateways?"
"We do," said Rackhir, "and I am grateful that you built her."
"We built her for ourselves, but it is good that others have used her well-and she them."
"Will you help us?" Rackhir said. "For Tanelorn?"
"We cannot-it is not lawful. Now, refresh yourselves and be welcome."
The two travellers were given foods, both soft and brittle, sweet and sour, and drink which seemed to
enter the pores of their skin as they quaffed it, and then the Guardian said: "We have caused a road to be
made. Fol-low it and enter the next world. But we warn you, it is the most dangerous of all."
And they set off down the road that the Guardians had caused to be made and passed through the fourth
gateway into a dreadful realm-the Ream of Law.
Nothing shone in the grey-lit sky, nothing moved, noth-ing marred the grey.
Nothing interrupted the bleak grey plain stretching on all sides of them, forever. There was no horizon. It
was a bright, clean wasteland. But there was a sense about the air, a presence of something past,
something which had gone but left a faint aura of its passing.
"What dangers could be here?" said Rackhir shudder-ing, "here where there is nothing?"
"The danger of the loneliest madness," Lamsar re-plied. Their voices were swallowed in the grey
expanse.
"When the Earth was very young'" Lamsar continued, his words trailing away across the wilderness,
"things were like this-but there were seas, there were seas. Here there is nothing."
"You are wrong," Rackhir said with a faint smile. "I have thought-here there is Law."
"That is true-but what is Law without something to decide between? Here is Law-bereft of justice."
They walked on, all about them an air of something intangible that had once been tangible. On they
walked through this barren world of Absolute Law.
Eventually, Rackhir spied something. Something that flickered, faded, appeared again until, as they
neared it, they saw that it was a man. His great head was noble, firm, and his body was massively built,
but the face was twisted in a tortured frown and he did not see them as they approached him.
They stopped before him and Lamsar coughed to at-tract his attention. He turned that great head and regarded
them abstractedly, the frown clearing at length, to be replaced by a calmer, thoughtful expression.
"Who are you?" asked Rackhir.
The man sighed. "Not yet," he said, "not yet, it seems.
More phantoms."
"Are we the phantoms?" smiled Rackhir. "That seems to be more your own nature." He watched as the
man began slowly to fade again, his form less definite, melting. The body seemed to make a great heave,
like a salmon attempting to leap a dam, then it was back again in a more solid form.
"I had thought myself rid of all that was superfluous, save my own obstinate shape," the man said tiredly,
"but here is something, back again. Is my reason failing-is my logic no longer what it was?"
"Do not fear," said Rackhir, "we are material beings."
"That is what I feared. For an eternity I have been stripping away the layers of unreality which obscure
the truth. I have almost succeeded in the final act, and now you begin to creep back. My mind is not what
it was, I think."
"Perhaps you worry lest we do not exist?" Lamsar said slowly, with a clever smile.
"You know that is not so-you do not exist, just as I do not exist." The frown returned, the features
twisted, the body began, again, to fade, only to resume, once more, its earlier nature. The man sighed.
"Even to reply to you is betraying myself, but I suppose a little relax-ation will serve to rest my powers
and equip me for the final effort of will which will bring me to the ultimate truth-the truth of non-being."
"But non-being involves non-thought, non-will, non-action," Lamsar said. "Surely you would not submit
yourself to such a fate?"
"There is no such thing as self. I am the only reason-ing thing in creation-I am almost pure reason. A 
little more effort and I shall be what I desire to be-the one truth in this non-existent universe. That
requires first ridding myself of anything extraneous around me-such as yourselves-and then making the
final plunge into the only reality."
"What is that?"
"The state of absolute nothingness where there is nothing to disturb the order of things because there is
no order of things."
"Scarcely a constructive ambition," Rackhir said.
"Construction is a meaningless word-like all words, like all so-called existence. Everything means
nothing-thai is the only truth."
"But what of this world? Barren as it is, it still has light and firm rock. You have not succeeded in reasoning
that out of existence," Lamsar said.
"That will cease when I cease," the man said slowly, "just as you will cease to be. Then there can be
nothing but nothing and Law will reign unchallenged."
"But Law cannot reign-it will not exist either, ac-cording to your logic."
"You are wrong-nothingness is the Law. Nothingness is the object of Law. Law is the way to its ultimate
state, the state of non-being."
"Well," said Lamsar musingly, "then you had better tell us where we may find the next gate."
"There is no gate."
"If there were, where would we find it?" Rackhir said.
"If a gate existed, and it does not, it would have been inside the mountain, close to what was once called
the Sea of Peace."
"And where was that?" Rackhir asked, conscious, now of their terrible predicament. There were no
landmarks, no sun, no stars-nothing by which they could determine direction.
"Close to the Mountain of Severity."
"Which way do you go?" Lamsar enquired of the man.
"Out-beyond-to nowhere."
"And where, if you succeed in your object, will we be consigned?"
"To some other nowhere. I cannot truthfully answer. But since you have never existed in reality,
therefore you can go on to no non-reality. Only I am real-and I do not exist."
"We are getting nowhere," said Rackhir with a smirk which changed to a frown.
"It is only my mind which holds the non-reality at
bay," the man said, "and I must concentrate or else it
will all come flooding back and I shall have to start from
the beginning again. In the beginning, there was
everything-Chaos. I created nothing."
With resignation, Rackhir strung his bow, fitted an ar-row to the string and aimed at the frowning man.
"You wish for non-being?" he said.
"I have told you so." Rackhir's arrow pierced his heart, his body faded, became solid and slumped to the
grass as mountains, forests, and rivers appeared around them. It was still a peaceful, well-ordered world
and Rackhir and Lamsar, as they strode on in search of the Mountain of Severity, savoured it. There
seemed to be no animal life here and they talked, in puzzled terms, about the man they had been forced
to kill, until, at length, they reached a great smooth pyramid which seemed, though it was of natural
origin, to have been carved into this form. They walked around its base until they discovered an opening.
There could be no doubt that this was the Mountain of Severity, and a calm ocean lay some distance
away.
They went into the opening and emerged into a delicate landscape. They were now through the last
gateway and in the Domain of the Grey Lords.
There were trees like stiffened spider-webs.
Here and there were blue pools, shallow, with shining water and graceful rocks balanced in them and 
around their shores. Above them and beyond them the light hills swept away towards a pastel yellow
horizon which was tinted with red, orange, and blue, deep blue.
They felt overlarge, clumsy, like crude, gross giants treading on the fine, short grass. They felt as if they
were destroying the sanctity of the place.
Then they saw a girl come walking towards them.
She stopped as they came closer to her. She was dressed in loose black robes which flowed about her as
if in a wind, but there was no wind. Her face was pale and pointed, her black eyes large and enigmatic.
At her long throat was a jewel.
"Sorana," said Rackhir thickly, "you died."
"I disappeared," said she, "and this is where I came. I was told that you would come to this place and
decided that I would meet you."
"But this is the Domain of the Grey Lords-and you serve Chaos."
"I do-but many are welcome at the Grey Lords' Court, whether they be of Law, Chaos, or neither. Come,
I will escort you there."
Bewildered, now, Rackhir let her lead the way across the strange terrain and Lamsar followed him.
Sorana and Rackhir had been lovers once, in Yeshpotoom-Kahlai,
the Unholy Fortress, where evil blossomed
and was beautiful. Sorana, sorceress, adventuress, was
without conscience but had had high regard for the Red
Archer since he had come to Yeshpotoom-Kahlai one
evening, covered in his own blood, survivor of a bizarre
battle between the Knights of Tumbru and Loheb
Bakra's brigand-engineers. Seven years ago, that had
been, and he had heard her scream when the Blue Assassins
had crept into the Unholy Fortress, pledged to
murder evil-makers. Even then he had been in the process of hurriedly leaving Yeshpotoom-Kahlai and
had considered it unwise to investigate what was obviously a death-scream. Now she was here-and if she
was here, then it was for a strong reason and for her own con-venience. On the other hand, it was in her
interests to serve Chaos and he must be suspicious of her.
Ahead of them now they saw many great tents of shimmering grey which, in the light, seemed composed
of all colours. People moved slowly among the tents and there was an air of leisure about the place.
"Here," Sorana said, smiling at him and taking his hand, "the Grey Lords hold impermanent court. They
wander about their land and have few artifacts and only temporary houses which you see. They will
make you welcome if you interest them."
"But will they help us?"
"You must ask them."
"You are pledged to Eequor of Chaos," Rackhir ob-served, "and must aid her against us, is that not so?"
"Here," she smiled, "is a truce. I can only inform Chaos of what I learn of your plans and, if the Grey
Lords aid you, must tell them how, if I can find out."
"You are frank, Sorana."
"Here there are subtler hypocrisies-and the subtlest lie of all is the full truth," she said, as they entered
the area of tall tents and made their way towards a certain one.
In a different realm of the Earth, the huge horde careered across the grasslands of the North, screaming
and singing behind the black-armoured horseman, their leader. Nearer and nearer they came to lonely
Tane-lorn, their motley weapons shining through the evening mists. Like a boiling tidal wave of
insensate flesh, the mob drove on, hysterical with the hate for Tanelorn which Narjhan had placed in
their thin hearts. Thieves, murderers, jackals, scavengers-a scrawny horde, but huge...
And in Tanelorn the warriors were grim-faced as
their out-riders and scouts flowed into the city with messages and estimates of the beggar army's 
strength.
Brut, in the silver armour of his rank, knew that two full days had passed since Rackhir had left for the
Sigh-ing Desert Three more days and the city would be en-gulfed by Narjhan's mighty rabble-and they
knew there was no chance of halting their advance. They might have left Tanelorn to its fate, but they
would not. Even weak Uroch would not. For Tanelorn the Mysterious had given them all a secret power
which each believed to be his only, a strength which filled them where before they had been hollow men.
Selfishly, they stayed-for to leave Tanelorn to her fate would be to become hollow again, and that they
all dreaded.
Brut was the leader and he prepared the defence of Tanelorn-a defence which might just have held
against the beggar army-but not against it and Chaos. Brut shuddered when he thought that if Chaos had
directed its full force against Tanelorn, they would be sobbing in Hell at that moment.
Dust rose high above Tanelorn, sent flying by the hooves of the scouts' and messengers' horses. One
came through the gate as Brut watched. He pulled his mount to a stop before the nobleman. He was the
messenger from Kaarlak, by the Weeping Waste, one of the nearest major cities to Tanelorn.
The messenger gasped: "I asked Kaarlak for aid but, as we supposed, they had never heard of Tanelorn
and suspected that I was an emissary from the beggar army sent to lead their few forces into a trap. I
pleaded with the Senators, but they would do nothing."
"Was not Elric there-he knows Tanelorn?"
"No, he was not there. There is a rumour which says that he himself fights Chaos now, for the minions of
Chaos captured his wife Zarozinia and he rides in pur-suit of them. Chaos, it seems, gains strength
everywhere in our realm."
Brut was pale.
"What of Jadmar-will Jadmar send warriors?" The
messenger spoke urgently, for many had been sent to the nearer cities to solicit aid.
"I do not know," replied Brut, "and it does not mat-ter now-for the beggar army is not three days march
from Tanelorn and it would take two weeks for a Jad-marian force to reach us."
"And Rackhir?"
"I have heard nothing and he has not returned. I have the feeling he will not return. Tanelorn is doomed."
Rackhir and Lamsar bowed before the three small men who sat in the tent, but one of them said impatiently:
"Do not humble yourselves before us, friends-we who are humbler than any." So they
straightened their backs and waited to be further addressed.
The Grey Lords assumed humility, but this, it seemed, was their greatest ostentation, for it was a pride
that they had. Rackhir realised that he would need to use subtle flattery and was not sure that he could,
for he was a warrior, not a courtier or a diplomat. Lamsar, too, re-alised the situation and he said:
"In our pride, Lords, we have come to learn the sim-pler truths which are only truths-the truths which
you can teach us."
The speaker gave us a self-deprecating smile and re-plied: "Truth is not for us to define, guest, we can
but offer our incomplete thoughts. They might interest you or help you to find your own truths."
"Indeed, that is so," Rackhir said, not wholly sure with what he was agreeing, but judging it best to
agree. "And we wondered if you had any suggestions on a mat-ter which concerns us-the protection of
our Tanelorn."
"We would not be so prideful as to interfere our own comments. We are not mighty intellects," the
speaker re-plied blandly, "and we have no confidence in our own decisions, for who knows that they
may be wrong and based on wrongly assessed information?"
"Indeed," said Lamsar, judging that he must flatter
them with their own assumed humility, and it is lucky
for us, Lords, that we do not confuse pride with learning-for
it is the quiet man who observes and says little who sees the most. Therefore, though we realise 
that you are not confident that your suggestions or help would be useful, none the less we, taking
example from your own demeanour, humbly ask if you know of any way in which we might rescue
Tanelorn?"
Rackhir had hardly been able to follow the complexi-ties of Lamsar's seemingly unsophisticated
argument, but he saw that the Grey Lords were pleased. Out of the corner of his eye he observed Sorana.
She was smiling to herself and it seemed evident, by the characteristics of that smile, that they had
behaved in the right way. Now Sorana was listening intently and Rackhir cursed to himself that the
Lords of Chaos would know of every-thing and might, even if they did gain the Grey Lords' aid, still be
able to anticipate and stop any action they took to save Tanelorn.
The speaker conferred in a liquid speech with his fel-lows and said finally: "Rarely do we have the
privilege to entertain such brave and intelligent men. How may our insignificant minds be put to your
advantage?"
Rackhir realised quite suddenly, and almost laughed, that the Grey Lords were not very clever after all.
Their flattery had got them the help they required. He said:
"Narjhan of Chaos heads a huge army of human scum-a beggar army-and is sworn to tear down Tanelorn
and kill her inhabitants. We need magical aid of some kind to combat one so powerful as Narjhan
and defeat the beggars."
"But Tanelorn cannot be destroyed . . ." said a Grey Lord. "She is Eternal . . ." said another. "But this
manifestation ..." murmured the third. "Ah, yes ..."
"There are beetles in Kaleef," said a Grey Lord who had not spoken before, "which emit a peculiar
venom."
"Beetles, Lord?" said Rackhir.
"They are the size of mammoths," said the third Lord, "but can change their size-and change the size of
their prey if it is too large for their gullets."
"As for that matter," the first speaker said, "there is a
chimera which dwells in mountains South of here-it
can change its shape and contains hate for Chaos since Chaos bred it and abandoned it with no real shape
of its own."
"Then there are four brothers of Himerscahl who are endowed with sorcerous power," said the second
Lord, but the first interrupted him:
"Their magic is no good outside our own dimension," he said. "I had thought, however, of reviving the
Blue Wizard."
"Too dangerous and, anyway, beyond our powers," said his companion.
They continued to debate for a while, and Rackhir and Lamsar said nothing, but waited.
Eventually the first speaker said:
"The Boatmen of Xerlerenes, we have decided, will probably be best equipped to aid you in defence of
Tanelorn. You must go to the mountains of Xerlerenes and find their lake."
"A lake," said Lamsar, "in a range of mountains, I see."
"No," the Lord said, "their lake lies above the moun-tains. We will find someone to take you there.
Perhaps they will aid you."
"You can guarantee nothing else?"
"Nothing-it is not our business to interfere. It is up to them to decide whether they will aid you or not."
"I see," said Rackhir, "thank you."
How much time had passed since he had left Tane-lorn? How much time before Narjhan's beggar army
reached the city? Or had it already done so?
Suddenly he thought of something, looked for Sorana, but she had left the tent.
"Where lies Xerlerenes?" Lamsar was asking.
"Not in our realm, one of the Grey Lords replied, "come we will find you a guide."
Sorana spoke the necessary word which took her im-
mediately into the blue half-world with which she was
so familiar. There were no other colours in it, but
many, many shades of blue. Here she waited until
Eequor noticed her presence. In the timelessness, she could not tell how long she had waited.
The beggar horde came to an undisciplined and slow halt at a sign from its leader. A voice rang hollowly
from the helm that was always closed.
"Tomorrow, we march against Tanelorn-the time we have anticipated is almost upon us. Make camp
now. Tomorrow shall Tanelorn be punished and the stones of her little houses will be dust on the wind."
The million beggars cackled their glee and wetted their scrawny lips. Not one of them asked why they
had marched so far, and this was because of Narjhan's power.
In Tanelorn, Brut and Zas the One-handed discussed the nature of death in quiet, over-controlled tones.
Both were filled with sadness, less for themselves than for Tanelorn, soon to perish. Outside, a pitiful
army tried to place a cordon around the town but failed to fill the gaps between men, there were so few
of them. Lights in the houses burned as if for the last time, and candles guttered moodily.
Sorana, sweating as she always did after such an ep-isode, returned to the plane occupied by the Grey
Lords and discovered that Rackhir, Lamsar, and their guide were preparing to leave. Eequor had told her
what to do-it was for her to contact Narjhan. The rest the Lords of Chaos would accomplish. She blew
her ex-lover a kiss as he rode from the camp into the night. He grinned at her defiantly, but when his face
was turned from her he frowned and they went in silence into the Valley of the Currents where they
entered the world where lay the Mountains of Xerlerenes. Almost as soon as they arrived, danger
presented itself.
Their guide, a wanderer called Timeras, pointed into the night sky which was spiked by the outlines of
crags.
"This is a world where the air elementals are domi-nant," he said. "Look!"
Flowing downwards in an. ominous sweep they saw a
flight of owls, great eyes gleaming. Only as they came nearer did the men realise that these owls were
huge, al-most as large as a man. In the saddle Rackhir strung his bow. Timeras said:
"How could they have learned of our presence so soon?"
"Sorana," Rackhir said, busy with the bow, "she must have warned the Lords of Chaos and they have
sent these dreadful birds." As the first one homed in, great claws grasping, great beak gaping, he shot it
in its feathery throat and it shrieked and swept upwards. Many arrows fled from his humming bowstring
to find a mark while Timeras drew his sword and slashed at them, ducking as they whistled
downwards.
Lamsar watched the battle but took no part, seemed thoughtful at a time when action was desired of him.
He mused: "If the spirits of air are dominant in this world, then they will resent a stronger force of other
ele-mentals," and he racked his brain to remember a spell.
Rackhir had but two arrows left in his quiver by the time they had driven the owls off. The birds had not
been used, evidently, to a prey which fought back and had put up a poor fight considering their
superiority.
"We can expect more danger," said Rackhir some-what shakily, "for the Lords of Chaos will use other
means to try and stop us. How far to Xerlerenes?"
"Not far," said Timeras, "but it's a hard road."
They rode on, and Lamsar rode behind them, lost in his own thoughts.
Now they urged their horses up a steep mountain path and a chasm lay below them, dropping, dropping,
dropping. Rackhir, who had no love for heights, kept as close to the mountainside as was possible. If he
had had gods to whom he could pray, he would have prayed for their help then.
The huge fish came flying-or swimming-at them as they rounded a bend. They were semi-luminous, big
as sharks but with enlarged fins with which they planed through the air like rays. They were quite
evidently fish.
Timeras drew his sword, but Rackhir had only two ar-rows left and it would have been useless against
the air-fish to have shot them, for there were many of the fish.
But Lamsar laughed and spoke in a high-pitched, stac-cato speech. "Crackhor-pishtasta salaflar!"
Huge balls of flame materialised against the black sky-flaring balls of multicoloured fire which shaped
themselves into strange, warlike forms and streamed towards the unnatural fish.
The flame-shapes seared into the big fish and they shrieked, struck at the fire-balls, burned, and fell
flaming down the deep gorge.
"Fire elementals!" Rackhir exclaimed.
"The spirits of the air fear such beings," Lamsar said calmly.
The flame-beings accompanied them the rest of the way to Xerlerenes and were with them when dawn
came, having frightened away many other dangers which the Lords of Chaos had evidently sent against
them.
They saw the boats of Xerlerenes in the dawn, at an-chor on a calm sky, fluffy clouds playing around
their slender keels, their huge sails furled.
"The boatmen live aboard their vessels," Timeras said, "for it is only their ships which deny the laws of
nature, not they."
Timeras cupped his hands about his mouth and called through the still mountain air: "Boatmen of Xerlerenes,
freemen of the air, guests come with a request for aid!"
A black and bearded face appeared over the side of one of the red-gold vessels. The man shielded his
eyes against the rising sun and stared down at them. Then he disappeared again.
At length a ladder of slim thongs came snaking down to where they sat their horses on the tops of the
moun-tains. Timeras grasped it, tested it and began to climb. Rackhir reached out and steadied the
ladder for him. It seemed too thin to support a man but when he had it in his hands he knew that it was
the strongest he had ever known.
Lamsar grumbled as Rackhir signalled for him to climb, but he did so and quite nimbly. Rackhir was the
last, following his companions, climbing up through the sky high above the crags, towards the ship that
sailed on the air.
The fleet comprised some twenty or thirty ships and Rackhir felt that with these to aid him, there was a
good chance to rescue Tanelorn-if Tanelorn survived.
Narjhan would, anyway, be aware of the nature of the
aid he sought
Starved dogs barked the morning in and the beggar horde, waking from where they had sprawled on the
ground, saw Narjhan already mounted, but talking to a newcomer, a girl in black robes that moved as if
in a wind-but there was no wind. There was a jewel at her long throat.
When he had finished conversing with the newcomer, Narjhan ordered a horse be brought for her and
she rode slightly behind him when the beggar army moved on-the last stage of their hateful journey to
Tanelorn.
When they saw lovely Tanelorn and how it was so poorly guarded, the beggars laughed, but Narjhan and
his new companion looked up into the sky.
"There may be time," said the hollow voice, and gave the order to attack.
Howling, the beggars broke into a run towards Tane-lorn. The attack had started.
Brut rose in his saddle and there were tears flowing down his face and glistening in his beard. His huge
war-axe was in one gauntleted hand and the other held a spiked mace across the saddle before him.
Zas the One-handed gripped the long and heavy broadsword with its pommel of a rampant golden lion
pointed downwards. This blade had won him a crown in Andlermaigne, but he doubted whether it would
suc-cessfully defend his peace in Tanelorn. Beside him stood Uroch of Nieva, pale-faced but angry as he
watched the ragged horde's implacable approach.
Then, yelling, the beggars met with the warriors of
Tanelorn and, although greatly outnumbered, the war-riors fought desperately for they were defending 
more than life or love-they were defending that which had told them of a reason for living.
Narjhan sat his horse aside from the battle, Sorana next to him, for Narjhan could take no active part in
the battle, could only watch and, if necessary, use magic to aid his human pawns or defend his person.
The warriors of Tanelorn, incredibly, held back the roaring beggar horde, their weapons drenched with
blood, rising and falling in that sea of moving flesh, flashing in the light of the red dawn.
Sweat now mingled with the salt tears in Brut's bris-tling beard and with agility he leapt dear of his black
horse as the screaming beast was cut from under him. The noble war-cry of his forefathers sang on his
breath and, although in his shame he had no business to use it, he let it roar from him as he slashed about
him with bit-ing war-axe and rending mace. But he fought hopelessly for Rackhir had not come and
Tanelorn was soon to die. His one fierce consolation was that he would die with the city, his blood
mingling with its ashes.
Zas, also, acquitted himself very well before he died of a smashed skull. His old body twitched as
trampling feet stumbled over it as the beggars made for Uroch of Nieva. The gold-pommelled sword was
still gripped in his single hand and his soul was fleeing for Limbo as Uroch, too, was slain fighting.
Then the Ships of Xerlerenes suddenly materialised in the sky and Brut, looking upward for an instant,
knew that Rackhir had come at last-though it might be too late.
Narjhan, also, saw the Ships and was prepared for them.
They skimmed through the sky, the fire elementals which Lamsar had summoned, flying with them. The
spirits of air and flame had been called to rescue weak-ening Tanelorn...
The Boatmen prepared their wagons and made themselves
ready for war. Their black faces had a concentrated
look and they grinned in their bushy beards. War-harness clothed them and they bristled with
weapons-long, barbed tridents, nets of steel mesh, curved swords, long harpoons. Rackhir stood in the
prow of the leading ship, his quiver packed with slim ar-rows loaned him by the Boatmen. Below him he
saw Tanelorn and was relieved that the city still stood.
He could see the milling warriors below, but it was hard to tell, from the air, which were friends and
which were foes. Lamsar called to the frisking fire elementals, instructing them. Timeras grinned and
held his sword ready as the ships rocked on the wind and dropped lower.
Now Rackhir observed Narjhan with Sorana beside him.
"The bitch has warned him-he is ready for us," Rackhir said, wetting his lips and drawing an arrow from
his quiver.
Down the Ships of Xerlerenes dropped, coursing downwards on the currents of air, their golden sails billowing,
the warrior crews straining over the side and keen for battle.
Then Narjhan summoned the Kyrenee.
Huge as a storm-cloud, black as its native Hell, the Kyrenee grew from the surrounding air and moved its
shapeless bulk forward towards the Ships of Xerlerenes, sending out flowing tendrils of poison towards
them. Boatmen groaned as the coils curled around their naked bodies and crushed them.
Lamsar called urgently to his fire elementals and they rose again from where they had been devouring
beggars, came together in one great blossoming of flame which moved to do battle with the Kyrenee.
The two masses met and there was an explosion which blinded the Red Archer with multi-coloured light
and sent the Ships rocking and shaking so that several capsized and sent their crews hurtling downwards
to death.
Blotches of flame flew everywhere and patches of poison
blackness from the body of the Kyrenee were flung
about, slaying those they touched before disappearing.
There was a terrible stink in the air-a smell of bum-ing, a smell of outraged elements which had never
been meant to meet.
The Kyrenee died, lashing about a wailing, while the flame elementals, dying or returning to their own
sphere, faded and vanished. The remaining bulk of the great Kyrenee billowed slowly down to the earth 
where it fell upon the scrabbling beggars and killed them, leav-ing nothing but a wet patch on the ground
for yards around, a patch glistening with the bones of beggars.
Now Rackhir cried: "Quickly-finish the fight before Narjhan summons more horrors!"
And the boats sailed downwards while the Boatmen cast their steel nets, pulling large catches of beggars
aboard their Ships and finishing the wriggling standings with their tridents or spears.
Rackhir shot arrow after arrow and had the satisfac-tion of seeing each one take a beggar just where he
had aimed it. The remaining warriors of Tanelorn, led by Brut who was covered in sticky blood but
grinning in his victory, charged towards the unnerved beggars.
Narjhan stood his ground, while the beggars, fleeing, streamed past him and the girl. Sorana seemed
frightened, looked up and her eyes met Rackhir's. The Red Archer aimed an arrow at her, thought better
of it and shot instead at Narjhan. The arrow went into the black armour but had no effect upon the Lord
of Chaos.
Then the Boatmen of Xerlernes flung down their largest net from the vessel in which Rackhir sailed and
they caught Lord Narjhan in its coils and caught So-rana, too.
Shouting their exhilaration, they pulled the struggling bodies aboard and Rackhir ran forward to inspect
their catch. Sorana had received a scratch across her face from the net's wire, but the body of Narjhan lay
still and dreadful in the mesh.
Rackhir grabbed an axe from a Boatman and knocked back the helm, his foot upon the chest.
"Yield, Narjhan of Chaos!" he cried in mindless merriment.
He was near hysterical with victory, for this was the first time a mortal had ever bested a Lord of
Chaos.
But the armour was empty, if it had ever been occu-pied by flesh, and Narjhan was gone.
Calm settled aboard the Ships of Xerlerenes and over the city of Tanelorn. The remnants of the warriors
had gathered in the city's square and were cheering their vic-tory.
Friagho, the Captain of Xerlerenes, came up to Rack-hir and shrugged. "We did not get the catch we
came for-but these will do. Thanks for the fishing, friend."
Rackhir smiled and gripped Friagho's black shoulder.
"Thanks for the aid-you have done us all a great service."
Friagho shrugged again and turned back to his nets, his trident poised. Suddenly Rackhir shouted: "No,
Fri-agho-let that one be. Let me have the contents of that net."
Sorana, the contents to which he'd referred, looked anxious as if she had rather been transfixed on the
prongs of Friagho's trident. Friagho said: "Very well, Red Archer-there are plenty more people on the
land," pulled at the net to release her.
She stood up shakily, looking at Rackhir apprehen-sively.
Rackhir smiled quite softly and said: "Come here, So-rana." She went to him and stood staring up at his
bony hawk's face, her eyes wide. With a laugh he picked her up and flung her over his shoulder.
"Tanelorn is safe!" he shouted. "You shall learn to love its peace with me!" And he began to clamber
down the trailing ladders that the Boatmen had dropped over the side.
Lamsar waited for him below. "I go now, to my her-mitage again."
"I thank you for your aid," said Rackhir. "Without it Tanelorn would no longer exist."
"Tanelorn will always exist while men exist," said the hermit. "It was not a city you defended today. It
was an ideal. That is Tanelorn."
And Lamsar smiled.
This Berkley Book contains the complete
text of the original edition.
STORMBRINGER
For J. G. Ballard. whose enthusiasm for
Eiric gave me the encouragement to begin
this particular book, my first attempt at
a full-length novel, and for Jim Cawthom,
whose illustrations based on my ideas in
turn gave me inspiration for certain scenes
in this book, and for Dave Britten, who
kept the magazines in which the serial
first appeared and who kindly loaned
them to me so that I could restore this
novel to its original shape and length.
STORM
BRINCER
Prologue
There came a time when there was great movement upon the
Earth and above it, when the destiny of Men and Gods was
hammered out upon'the forge of Fate, when monstrous wars
were brewed and mighty deeds were designed. And there rose
up in this time, which was called the Age of the Young Kingdoms,
heroes. Greatest of these heroes was a doom-driven adventurer
who bore a crooning rune blade that he loathed.
His name was Brie of Melnibone, king of ruins, lord of a
scattered race that had once ruled the ancient world. Eiric.
sorcerer and swordsman, slayer of kin, despoiler of his home
land, white-faced albino, last of his line.
Eiric, who had come to Kariaak by the Weeping Waste
and had married a wife in whom he found some peace, some
surcease from the torment in him.
And Eiric, who had within him a greater destiny than he
knew, now dwelt in Kariaak with Zarozinia, his wife. and his
sleep was troubled, his dream dark, one brooding night in the
Month of the Anemone.. 
BOOK ONE
Dead God's Homecoming
la which, at long last, Eric's fate begins to be revealed to
hhn as the forces of Law and Chaos gather strength for the
final battle which will decide the future of Eiric's world...
One
Above the rolling earth great clouds tumbled down and bolts
of lightning charged groundwards to slash the midnight black,
split trees in twain and sear through roofs that cracked and
broke.
The dark mass of forest trembled with the shock and out
of it crept six hunched, unhuman figures who paused to stare
beyood the low hills towards the outline of a city. It was a
city of squat walls and slender spires, of graceful towers and
domes; and it bad a name which the leader of the creatures
knew. Kariaak by the Weeping Waste it was called.
Not of natural origin, the storm was ominous. It groaned
around the city of Kariaak as the creatures skulked past the
open gates and made their way through shadows towards the
elegant palace where Eiric slept. The leader raised an axe of
black iron in its clawed hand. The group came to a stealthy
halt and regarded the sprawling palace which lay on a hill
urrounded by languorously-scented gardens. The earth shook
as lightning lashed it and thunder prowled across the turbulent
sky.
"Chaos has aided us in this matter," the leader grunted.
**Sec-already the guards fall in magic slumber and our entrance
is thus made simple. The Lords of Chaos are good to
their servants."
He spoke the truth. Some supernatural force had been at
work and the warriors guarding Eiric's palace had dropped to
tee ground, their snores echoing the thunder. The servants of
Chaos crept past the prone guards, into the main courtyard
and from there into the darkened palace. Unerringly they
climbed twisting staircases, moved softly along gloomy corridors,
to arrive at length outside the room where Eiric and
his wife lay in uneasy sleep.
As the leader laid a hand upon the door, a voice cried out
13
Michael Moorcock
from within the room: "What's this? What things of heU dis-
rupt my rest?11
"He sees list" sharply whispered one of the creatures.
"No," the leader said, "he sleeps-but such a sorcerer as
this Eiric is not so easily lulled into a stupor. We had best
make speed and do our work, for if be wakes it will be the
harder!"
He twisted the handle and eased the door open, his axe
half raised. Beyond the bed, heaped with tumbled furs and
silks, lightning gashed the night again, showing the white face
of the albino close to that of his dark-haired wife.
Even as they entered, he rose stiffly in the bed and his
crimson eyes opened, staring out at them. For a moment the
eyes were glazed and then the albino forced himself awake,
shouting: "Begone, you creatures of my dreams!"
The leader cursed and leaped forward, but he had been instructed
not to slay this man. He raised the axe threateningly.
"Silence-your guards cannot aid you!"
Eiric jumped from the bed and grasped the thing's wrist,
his face close to the fanged muzzle. Because of his albmoism
he was physically weak and required magic to give him
strength. But so quickly did he move, that he had wrested the
axe from the creature's hand and smashed the shaft between
its eyes. Snarling, it fell back, but its comrades jumped forward.
There were five of them, huge muscles moving beneath
their furred skins.
Eiric clove the skull of the first as others grappled with
him. His body was spattered with the thing's blood and brains
and he gasped in disgust at the fetid stuff. He managed to
wrench his arm away and bring the axe up and down into the
collarbone of another. But then be felt his legs gripped and
he fell, confused but still battling. Then there came a great
blow on bis head and pain blazed through him. He made an
effort to rise, failed and fell back insensible.
Thunder and lightning still disturbed the night when, with
throbbing head, he awoke and got slowly to his feet using a
bedpost as support He stared dazedly around him.
Zarozinia was gone. The only other figure in the room was
the stiff corpse of the beast be had killed. His black-haired
girl-wife had been abducted.
Shaking, he went to the door and flung it open, calling for
his guards, but none answered him.
His runesword Stonnbnnger hung in the city's armoury
STORMB RINGER 15
and would take time to get His throat tight with pain and
nwf, he ran down the corridors and stairways, dazed with
anxiety, trying to grasp the implications of his wife's disappearance.
Above (he palace, thunder still crashed, eddying about in
the noisy night The palace seemed deserted and he had the
sodden feeling that he was completely alone, mat he had
been abandoned. But as be ran out into the main courtyard
and saw me insensible guards he realised at once that their
lumber could not be natural. Realisation was coming even as
he ran through the gardens, through the gates and down to
tihe city, but mere was no sign of bis wife's abductors.
Where bad they gone?
He raised his eyes to the shouting sky, his white face stark
and twisted with frustrated anger. There was no sense to it
Why had they taken her? He had enemies, he knew, but none
who could summon such supernatural help. Who, apart from
himself, could work this mighty sorcery that made the skies
themselves shake and a city sleep?
To the house of Lord Voashoon. Chief Senator, of Kariaak.
od father of Zarozinia, Eiric ran panting like a wolf. He
banged with his fists upon the door, yelling at the astonished
servants within.
"Opcnl It is Eiric. HurryF
The doors gaped back and he was through them. Lord
Voashoon came stumbling down the stair into the chamber,
his face heavy with sleep.
"What is if Eiric?**
"Summon your warriors. Zarozinia has been abducted.
Thoee who took her were demons and may be far from here
by now-but we must search in case they escaped by land."
Lord Voashoon's face became instantly alert and he
shouted terse orders to his servants between listening to Elite's
explanation of what had happened.
"And I must have entrance into the armoury," Eiric concluded.
'T must have Stonnbringeri"
"But you renounced the blade for fear of its evil power
over you!" Lord Voashoon reminded him quietly.
Eiric replied impatiently. "Aye-but I renounced the blade
tar Zarozinia's sake, too. I must have Stonnbringcr if I am to
bring her back. The logic is simple. Quickly, give me the
key."
In silence Lord Voashoon fetched the key and led Eiric to
16
Michael Moorcock
the armoury where the weapons and armour of his ancestors
was held, unused for centuries. Through the dusty place
strode Eiric to a dark alcove that seemed to contain something
which lived.
He heard a soft moaning come from the great black battle
blade as he reached out a slim-fingered white hand to take it
It was heavy, yet perfectly balanced, a two-handed broadsword
of prodigious size, with its wide crosspiece and its
blade smooth and broad, stretching for over five feet from
the hilt Near the hilt, mystic runes were engraved and even
Brie did not know what they fully signified.
"Again I must make use of you, Storrobringer," he said as
he buckled the sheath about his waist, "and I must conclude
(hat we are too closely linked now for less than death to separate
us.**
With that he was striding from the armoury and back to
the courtyard where mounted guards were already sitting nervous
steeds, awaiting his instructions.
Standing before them, he drew Stonnbringer so that the
sword's strange, black radiance flickered around him, his
white face, as pallid as bleached bone, staring out of it at the
horsemen.
"You go to chase demons this night Search the countryside,
scour forest and plain for those who have done this
thing to our princess! Though it's likely that her -ibdnctors
used supernatural means to make their escape, we cannot be
sure. So search-and search well!'*
All through the raging night they searched but could find
no trace of either the creatures or Eiric's wife. And when
dawn came, a smear of blood in the morning sky, his men returned
to Karlaak where EIric awaited them. now filled with
the nigromantic vitality which his sword supplied.
"Lord EIric-shall we retrace our trail and see if daylight
yields a clue?" cried one.
"He does not hear you," another murmured as EIric gave
no sign.
But then EIric turned his pain-racked head and he said
bleakly, "Search no more. I have had time to mediate and
must seek my wife with the aid of sorcery. Disperse. You can
do nothing further."
Then he left them and went back towards his palace,
knowing that there was still ooc way of learning where ZaroSTORMBRINGER
17
xfala had been taken. It was a method which he Ul-lflced. yet
jt would have to be employed.
Curtly, upon returning, EIric ordered everyone from his
dumber, barred the door and stared down at the dead thing.
to congealed blood was still on him, but the axe with which
be had stain it had been taken away by hs comrades.
EIric prepared the body, stretching out its limbs on the
floor. He drew the shutters of the windows so that no tight filtered
into the room, and lit a brazier in one corner. It swayed
on its chains as me oil-soaked rushes flared. He went to a
email chest by the window and took out a pouch. From thia
he removed a bunch of dried herbs and with a hasty gesture
flung them on the brazier so that it gave off a sickly odour
and die room began to fill with smoke. Then he stood over
the corpse, his body rigid, and began to sing an incantation in
the old language of his forefathers, the sorcerer emperors of
Mdnibone. The song seemed scarcely akin to human speech,
riling and falling from a deep groan to a high-pitched shriek.
The brazier spread flaring red light over EIric's face and
grotesque shadows skipped about the room. On the floor the
dead corpse began to stir, its ruined head moving from side
to ride. EIric drew his runesword and placed it before him,
his two hands on the hilt "Arise, soulless one!" he commanded.
Slowly, with jerky movements, the creature raised itself
stiffly upright and pointed a clawed finger at EIric, its glazed
eyes staring as if beyond him.
"An mis,*' it whispered, "was pre-ordained. Think not that
you can escape your fate, EIric of Melnibone. You have tampered
with my corpse and 1 am a creature of Chaos. My
masters win avenge me.**
"How?"
"Your destiny is already laid down. You win know soon
enough."
"Tell me. dead one, why did you come to abduct my wife?
Who sent you hither? Where has my wife been taken?"
"Three questions. Lord EIric. Requiring three answers. You
know that the dead who have been raised by sorcery can answer
nothing directly.'*
"Aye-that I know. So answer as you can.**
"Then listen well for I may recite only once my reed and
18
Michael'Moorcock
then must return to the nether-regions where my being may
peacefully rot to nothing. Listen;
"Beyond the ocean brews a baffle;
Beyond the battle blood shall faU.
If Elfins kinsman ventures with him
(Bearing a twin of that he bears)
To a place where, man-forsaken.
Dwells the one who should not live,
Then a bargain shall be entered^
Bine's wife shall be restored."
With this, die dung fell to die floor and did not stir
thereafter.
Eiric went to die window and opened the shutters. Used as
be was to enigmatic verse-omens, this one was difficult to uoraveL
As daylight entered the room, the rushes spluttered and
die smoke faded. Beyond the ocean . . . There were many
oceans.
He resheathed his runesword and climbed on to the disordered
bed to lie down and comtemplate die reed. At last, after
long minutes of this contemplation, he remembered
something he had heard from a traveller who bad come to
Kariaak. from Tarkesh. a nation of me Western Continent,
beyond the Pale Sea.
The traveller had told him how diere was trouble brewing
between me land of Dharijor and me other nations of me
west Dharijor had contravened treaties she had signed with
her neighbouring kingdoms and had signed a new one with
me Theocrat of Pan Tang. Pan Tang was an unholy island
dominated by its dark aristocracy of warrior-wizards. It was
from here mat Bine's old enemy, Theleb K'aarna, had come.
Its capital of Hwamgaari was called the City of Screaming
Statues and until recently its residents had had little contact
with the folk of die outside world. Jagreen Lern was me new
Theocrat and an ambitious man. His alliance with Dharijor
could only mean mat be sought more power over the nations
of the Young Kingdoms. The traveller bad said dial strife
was sure to break out at any moment since diere was ample
evidence that Dharijor and Pan Tang had entered a war alliance.
Now. as his memory improved, Eiric related mis information
with me news he had had recently that Queen Yiabana
STORMBRINGER 19
of Ibarkor, a neighbouring kingdom to Dharijor, had recruited
tfae aid of Dyvim Slorm and his Imrryrian mercenaries.
And Dyvim Slorm was Eiric's only kinsman. This meant that
Jharkor must be preparing for battle against Dharijor. The
two facts were too closely linked with die prophecy to be ignored.
Even as he thought upon it, be was gathering his clothes
together and preparing for a journey. There was nothing for
ft but to go to Jharkor and speed ily, for diere he was sure to
meet his kinsman. Aod diere, also, diere would soon be a
battle if all die evidence were true.
Yet the prospect of die journey, which would take many
days, caused a cold ache to grow in his heart as be thought
of me weeks to come in which be would not know how his
wife fared.
"No time for that," he told himself as he laced up bis
black quilted jacket. "Action is all mat's required of me
now-and speedy action."
He held me sheathed runeblade before him, staring beyond
it into space. "1 swear by Arioch diat tfiose who have done
mis, whedier diey be man or immortal, shall suffer from their
deed. Hear me, Arioch! That is my oadi!"
But his words found no answer and be sensed diat Arioch,
bis patron demon, had either not heard him or else heard bis
ath and was unmoved.
Then he was striding from me death-heavy chamber, yelling
for bis horse.
Two
Where the Sighing Desert gave way to the borders of Ilmiora,
between the coasts of the Eastern continent and the lands of
Tarkesh, Dharijor and Shazar, there lay the Pale Sea.
It was a cold sea, a morose and chilling sea, but ships preferred
to cross from Ilmiora to Dharijor by means of it,
rather than chance the weirder dangers of the Straits of
Chaos which were lashed by eternal storms and inhabited by
malevolent sea-creatures.
On the deck of an Umioran schooner, Eiric of Melnibone
stood wrapped in his cloak, shivering and staring gloomily at
the cloud-covered sky.
The captain, a stocky man with blue, humorous eyes, came
struggling along the deck towards him. He had a cup of hot
wine in his hands. He steadied himself by clinging to a piece
of rigging and gave the cup to Eiric.
"Thanks,** said the albino gratefully. He sipped the wine.
"How soon before we make the port of Banarva, captain?"
The captain pulled the collar of his leather jerkin about his
unshaven face. **We're sailing slow, but we should sight the
Tarkesh peninsula well before sunset" Banarva was in
Tarkesh* one of its chief trading posts. The captain leaned on
the rail. "I wonder how long these waters wffl be free for
ships now that war's broken out between the kingdoms of the
west. Both Dharijor and Pan Tang have been notorious in the
past for their piratical activities. They'll soon extend them under
the guise of war, ITl warrant.**
Eiric nodded vaguely, his mind on other things than the
prospect of piracy.
Disembarking in me chilly evening at the port of Banarva,
Eiric soon saw ample evidence that war darkened the lands
of the Young Kingdoms. There were rumours rife, talk of
nothing but battles gained and warriors lost From the con-
20
STORMBRINGER 21
fined gossip, he could get no dear impression of how the war
went, save that the decisive battle was yet to be fought
Loquacious Banarvans told him that all over the Western
Continent men were marching. From Myyrrhn, he heard, the
winged men were flying. From Jharkor, the White Leopards,
Queen Yishana's personal guard, ran towards Dharijor, while
Dyvim Slonn and his mercenaries pressed northwards to meet
them.
Dharijor was the strongest nation of me west and Pan
Tang was a formidable ally, more for her people's occult
knowledge man for her numbers. Next in power to Dharijor
came Jharkor, who, with her allies Tarkesh, Myyrrhn and
Shazar, was still not as strong as those who threatened the security
of the Young Kingdoms.
For some years Dharijor had sought an opportunity for
conquest and the hasty alliance against her had been made in
an effort to stop her before she had fully prepared for conquest
Whether this effort would succeed, Eiric did not know,
and those who spoketo him were equally uncertain.
The streets of Banarva were packed with soldiers and supply
trains of horses and oxen. The harbour was filled with
warships and it was difficult to find lodgings since most inns
and many private houses had been requisitioned by the army.
And it was the same all over the Western Continent Everywhere,
men strapped metal about them, bestrode heavy chargers,
sharpened their arms, and rode beneath bright silken
banners to slay and to despoiL
Here, without doubt, Eiric reflected, he would find the
battle of uie prophecy. He tried to forget his tormented longing
for news of Zarozinia and turned bis moody eyes towards
the west Stormbringer hung like an anchor at his side and ho
fingered it constantly, hating it even as it fed him his vitality.
He spent the night in Banarva and by morning had hired a
good horse and was riding through the sparse grassland
towards Jharkor.
Across a war-torn world rode Eiric, his crimson eyes burning
with a fierce anger at the sights of wanton destruction he
witnessed. Although be had himself lived by his sword for
many years and had committed acts of murder, robbery and
urbicide, he disliked the senselessness of wars such as this, of
men who killed one another for only the vaguest of reasons.
It was not that he pitied the slain or hated the slayers; he was
too remote from ordinary men to care greatly about what
22
Michael Moorcock
they did. Yet, in bis own tortured way, he was an idea&t
who, because be lacked peace and security himself, resulted
- the sights of strife which this war brought to him. His ancestors,
he knew, had also been remote, yet they had delighted
in the conflicts of the men of the Young Kingdoms, observing
mem from a distance and judging themselves above nidi activities;
above the morass of sentiment and emotion in which
these new men struggled. For ten thousand years me sorcerer-emperors
of Memibone had ruled this world, a race
without conscience or moral creed, unneedful of reasons for
their acts of conquest, seeking no excuses for their natural
malicious tendencies. But Hric, the last in the direct line of
emperors, was not like them. He was capable of cruelty and
malevolent sorcery, had little pity, yet could love and hate
more violently than ever his ancestors. And these strong passions,
perhaps, had been the cause of his breaking with his
homeland and travelling me world to compare himself
against these new men since be could find none in Memibone
who shared his feelings. And it was because of these twin
forces of love and hate that be had returned to have vengeance
on his cousin Yyrkoon who had put Cymorfl, Elric'9
betrothed, into a magic slumber and usurped me kingship of
Melnibone, the Dragon Isle, last territory of the fallen Bright
Empire. With the aid of a fleet of reavers, Eiric had razed
Inuryr in his vengeance-taking, destroyed the Dreaming City
and scattered forever the race who had founded h so that the
last survivors were now mercenaries roaming the worid to seQ
their arms to whomever bid highest. Love and bate; they had
led him to kill Yyrkoon who deserved death and, inadvertenfly,
Cymoril, who did not Love and hate. They welled in
him now as bitter smoke stung his throat and be passed a
straggling group of townspeople who were fleeing, without
knowledge of their direction, from me latest depredation of
the roving Dharijorian troops who had struck far into this
part of Tarkesh and had met little hindrance from the armies
of King Hilran of Tarkesh whose main force was concentrated
further north, readying itself for the major battle.
Now Eiric rode close to me Western Marches, near the
Jharkorian border. Here lived sturdy foresters and harvesters
in better times. But now the forests were blackened and burnt
and the crops of the field were mined.
His journey, which was speedy for he wasted 06 time. took
him through one of the stark forests where remnants of trees
STORMBRINOER 23
cast cold silhouettes against me grey, seething sky. He raised
the hood of his cloak over his bead so that the heavy black
fabric completely hid his face, and rode on as rain rushed
suddenly down and beat through the skeleton trees, sweeping
across the distant plains beyond so that all the world seemed
grey and black with the hiss of the rain a constant and depressing
sound.
Then, as he passed a ruined hovel which was half cottage
and half hole in the earth, a cawing voice called out:
"Lord Eiricr
Astonished that he should be recognised, he turned his
bleak face in the direction of the voice, pushing his hood
back as he did so. A ragged figure appeared in the hole's
opening. It beckoned him closer. Puzzled, he walked his horse
towards the figure and saw that it was an old man, or perhaps
a woman, he couldn't tell.
**You know my name. How?"
**Thou art a legend throughout the Young Kingdoms. Who
could not recognise that white face and heavy blade thou art
carrying?**
True, perhaps, but I have a notion there is more to this
than chance recognition. Who are you and how do you know
the High Speech of Memibone?" Eiric deliberately used the
coarse Common Speech.
**Thou shouldst know mat all who practise dark sorcery use
the High Tongue of those who are pastmasters in its arts.
Wouldst thou guest with me a while?"
Eiric looked at the hovel and shook his head. He was fastidious
at the best of times. The wretch smiled and made a
mock bow, restoring to the Common Speech and saying: "So
the mighty lord disdains to grace my poor home. But does he
not perhaps wonder why the fire which raged through this
forest a while ago did not, in fact, harm me?"
"Aye,** said Eiric thoughtfully, **that is an interesting
riddle.**
The hag took a step towards him. "Soldiers came not a
month gone-from Pan Tang they were. Devil Riders with
weir hunting tigers running with mem. They despoiled the
harvest and burnt even the forests that those who fled them
might not eat game or berries here. I lived in this forest all
my life, doing a little simple magic and prophecy for my
needs. But when I saw the walls of flame soon to engulf me,
24
I cried the name of  demon I knew-a thinf from ChftM
which, latterly. I had dared not SUBUDOIL It cune.
"*Savc me,' cried I, 'And what would ye do in return?*
aid the demon. 'Anything,' I quoth. Then bear this message
for my masters,' it said. 'When the fcinslayer known as Eiric
of Melnibooe shall pass this way, tell him that there is one
kinsman he shall not slay and be will be found in Sequaloris.
If Brie loves his wife. he will play his role. If be plays it
well, his wife shall be returned.' So I fixed the message in my
mind and now give it thee as I swore."
"Thanks," said Eiric, **and what did you give in the first
place for the power to summon such a demon?"
"Why, my soul, of course. But it was an old one and not
of much worth. Hell could be no worse man this existence."
'Then why did you not let yourself burn, your soul unbartered?"
"I wish to live," said me wretch, smiling again. "Oh, life is
good. My own life, perhaps, is squalid, yet the life around me
that is what I love. But let me not keep you, my lord, for you
have weightier matters on your mind." Once more the wretch
gave a mock bow as Eiric rode off, puzzled, but encouraged.
His wife still lived and was safe. But what bargain must he
strike before be could get her back?
Savagely he goaded his horse into a gallop, heading for Sequaloris
in Jbarkor. Behind him, faintly through die beating
rain, he heard a cackling at once mocking aod miserable.
Now his direction was not so vague, and be rode at great
speed.-but cautiously, avoiding the roving bands of invaders,
imtil at length the arid plains gave way to the lusher wheatlands
of the Sequa province of Jharfcor. Another day's ride
and Eiric entered the small walled city of Sequaloris which
had so far not suffered attack. Here, he discovered preparations
for war and learnt news that was of greater interest to
him.
The InuTyriao mercenaries, led by Dyvim Storm, Eiric's
cousin and son of Dyvim Tvar, Eiric's old friend, were due to
arrive next day in Sequaloris.
There had been a certain enmity between Eiric and the
Inuryrians since the albino had been the direct cause of their
need to leave the ruins of the Dreaming City and live as mercenaries.
But those times were past, long since, and on two
previous occasions he and the Imrryrians had fought on the
25
same side. He wu their leader by right and the tics of tradition
were strong in the elder race. Eiric prayed to Arioch that
Dyvim Slorm would have aome due to his wife's whereabouts.
At noon of the next day the mercenary army rode swaggering
into the city. Eiric met them dose to the city gate. The
hnrryrian warriors were obviously weary from a long ride
and were loaded with booty since, before Yishana sent for
mem, they had been raiding in Shazar dose to the Marshes
of the Mist. They were different from any other race, these
Imrryrians, with their tapering faces, slanting eyes and high
cheekbones. They were pale and slim with long, soft hair
drifting to their shoulders. The finery they wore was not
stolen, but definitely Meinibonean in design; shimmering
cloths of gold, blue and green, metals of delicate workmanship
and intricately patterned. They carried lances with long.
sweeping heads and there were slender swords at their sides.
They sat arrogantly in their saddles, convinced of their supe-
riority over other mortals, and were, as Eiric, not quite human
in their unearthly beauty.
He rode up to meet Dyvim Slorm, his own sombre clothes
contrasting with theirs. He wore a tall-collared jacket of quilted
leather, black and buckled in by a broad, plain belt at
which hung a poignard and Stonnbringer. His milk-white hair
was held from his eyes by a fillet of black bronze and his
breeks and boots were also black. All mis black set off sharply
his white skin and crimson, glowing eyes.
Dyvim Slorm bowed in his saddle, showing only slight surprise.
"Cousin Eiric. So the omen was true.'*
"What omen, Dyvim Slorm?'*
"A falcon's-your name bird if I remember."
It bad been customary for Melniboneans to identify newborn
children with birds of their choice; thus Eiric's was a
falcon, hunting bird of prey.
"What did it tell you, cousin?" Eiric asked eagerly.
"It gave a puzzling message. While we had barely gone
from the Marshes of the Mist, it came and perched on my
shoulder, and spoke in human tongue. It told me to come to
Sequaloris and there I would meet my king. From Sequaloris
we were to journey together to join Yishana*s army and the
battle, whether won or lost, would resolve the direction of
26 Michael Moorcock
our linked destinies thereafter. Do you make sense of that,
cousin?"
"Some^ Eiric frowned. "But come-I haw a place
reserved for you at the inn. I will tell you all I know over
wine-if we can find decent wine in this forsaken hamlet I
need help, cousin; as much help as I can obtain* for Zarozinia
has been abducted by supernatural agents and I have a
feeling that this and the wars are but two elements in a
greater play.**
"Then quickly, to the inn. My curiosity is further piqued.
This matter increases in interest for me. First falcons and
omens, now abductions and strife! What else. I wonder, are
we to meet!**
With the Imrryrians straggling after diem through the
cobbled streets, scarcely a hundred warriors but hardened by
their outlawed lift, Eiric and Dyvim Slorm made their way to
the inn and there, in haste, Eiric outlined all he had learned.
Before replying, his cousin sipped bis wine and carefully
placed the cup upon the board, pursing his lips. "I have a
feeling in my bones that we are puppets in some struggle between
the gods. For all our blood and flesh and wul, we can
see none of the bigger conflict save for a few scarcely related
details."
"That may be so," said Eiric impatiently, "but Fm greatly
angered at being involved and require my wife's release. I
have no notion why we, together, must make the bargain for
her return, neither can I guess what h is we have that those
who captured her want But, if the omens are sent by the
same agents, then we had best do as we are told, for the
meantime, until we can see matters more clearty. Then, perhaps,
we can act upon our own volition.**
"That's wise," Dyviro Slorm nodded, "and Fm with you in
it" He smued slightly and- added: "Whether 1 like it or not. I
fancy."
Eiric said: "Where lies the main army of Dharijor and Pan
Tang? I heard it was gathering."
"It has gathered-and marches closer. The impending
battle will decide who rules the western lands. I'm committed
to Yishana's aide, not only because she has employed us to
aid her, but because I felt that if the warped lords of Pan
Tang dominate these nations, then tyranny will come upon
27
them and they will threaten the security of the whole world.
It i a sad thing when a Mclnibonean has to consider such
problems." He smiled ironically. "Aside from that, I like
uiem not these aorcerou* upstarts-they seek to emulate the
Bright Empire."
"Aye." Eiric said. They are an island culture, as ours was.
They are sorcerers and warriors as our ancestors were. But
their sorcery is less healthy than ever ours was. Our ancestors
committed frightful deeds, yet it was natural to them. These
newcomers, more human than we, have perverted their humanity
whereas we never possessed it in the same degree.
There will never be another Bright Empire, nor can their
power last more than ten thousand years. This is a fresh age,
Dyvim Slorm, in more man one way. The time of subtle sorcery
is on the wane. Men an finding new means of harnessing
natural power."
"Our knowledge is ancient," Dyvim Slorm agreed, "yet, so
old is it that it has little relation to present events, I think.
Our logic and learning are suited to the past..."
"I think you are right** said Eiric, whose mingled emotions
were suited neither to past present nor future. "Aye, it is fitting
that we should be wanderers, for we have no place in
this world."
They drank in silence, moodily, their minds on matters of
philosophy. Yef for all this, Eiric's thoughts were forever
turning to Zarozinia and the fear of what might have befallen
her. The very innocence of this girl, her vulnerability and her
youth had been, to some degree at least his salvation. His
protective love for her had helped to keep him from brooding
too deeply on his own doom-filled life and her company had
eased bis melancholy. The strange reed of the dead creature
lingered in his memory. Undoubtedly the reed had referred to
a battle, and the falcon which Dyvin Slorm had seen had spoken
of one also The battle was sure to be the forthcoming
one between Yishana's forces and those of Sarosto of DhariJor
and Jagreen Lem of Pan Tang. If he was to find Zarozinia
then be must go with Dyvim Slonn and there take part
in UK conflict- Though he might perish, he reasoned that he
had best do as the omens ordered-otherwise he could lose
even the slight chance of ever seeing Zarozinia again. He
turned to his cousin.
28
Michael Moorcock
"111 make my way with you tomorrow, and use my blade
in the battle. Whatever else, I have the feeling that Yisbana
will need every warrior against the Theocrat and his allies."
Dyvim Slorm agreed. "Not only our doom but the doom of
nations will be at stake in this ..."
Three
Tea.terrible men drove their yellow chariots down a black
- mountain which vomited blue and scarlet fire and shook in a
spasm of destruction.
In such a manner, all over the globe, the forces of nature
were disrupted and rebellious. Though few realised it, the
earth was changing. The Ten knew why, and they knew of
Eiric and how their knowledge linked with him.
The night was pale purple and the sun hung a bloody globe
over the mountains, for it was late summer. In the valleys,
cottages were burning as smoking lava smacked against the
straw roofs.
Sepiriz, in the leading chariot, saw the villagers running, a
confused rabble-like ants whose hills had been scattered. He
turned to the blue-armoured man behind him and he smiled
almost gaily.
"See them run,** he said. "See them run, brother. Oh, the
joy of it-such forces there are at work!"
" Tia good to have woken at this time," his brother agreed,
abouting over the rumbling noise of the volcano.
Then the smile left Sepiriz and his eyes narrowed: He
lashed at his twin horses with a bull-hide whip, so that blood
laced the flanks of the great black steeds and they galloped
even faster down the steep mountain.
In the village, one man saw the Ten in the distance. He
orieked, voicing his fear in a warning:
"The fire has driven them out of the mountain. Hide-escape
t The men from the volcano have awakened-they are
coming. The Ten have awakened according to the
prophecy-it is the end of the world!" Then the mountain
gushed a fresh spewing of hot rock and flaming lava and the
man was struck down, screamed as he burned and died. He
died needlessly, for the Ten had no interest in him or his fellows.
29
30 Michael Moorcock
Sepiriz and his brothers rode straight through the village,
their chariot wheels rattling on the coarse street, the hooves
of their horses pounding.
Behind them, the mountain bellowed. "To Nihrainr cried
Sepiriz. "Speedily, brethren, for there is much work to do. A
blade must be brought from Limbo and a pair of men must
befcund to carry it to Xanyaw!"
Joy filled him as he saw the earth shuddering about him
and heard the gushing of fire and rock behind him. His black
body glistened, reflecting the flames of the burning houses.
The horses leaned in their harness, dragging the bucking
chariot at wild speed, their hooves blurred movement over
the ground so that it often seemed they flew.
Perhaps they did, for the steeds of Nihrain were known to
be different from ordinary beasts.
Now they flung themselves along a gorge, now up a mountain
path, making their speedy way towards the Chasm of
Nihrain, the ancient home of the Ten who had not returned
there for two thousand years.
Again, Sepiriz laughed. He and his brothers bore a terrible
responsibility, for though they had no loyalty to men or gods,
they were Fate's spokesmen and thus bore an awful
knowledge within their immortal skulls.
For centuries they had slept in their mountain chamber,
dwelling dose to the dormant heart of die volcano since ex'
tremes of heat and cold bothered them little. Now the spewing
rock had awakened them and they knew that their time
bad come-the time for which they had been waiting for mfllenia.
This was why Sepriz sang in Joy. At last he and his brothers
were to be allowed to perform their ultimate functioo.
And this involved two Melniboneans, the two surviving members
of the Royal Line of the Bright Empire.
Sepiriz knew they lived-they had to be alive, for without
them Fate's scheme was impossible. But there were thorn
upon the earth, Sepiriz knew, who were capable of cheating
Fate, so powerful were they. Their miaions lay everywhere,
particularly among the new race of men, but ghouls and
demons were also their tools.
This made his chosen task the harder.
But now-to Nihrain! To the hewn city and there to draw
the threads of destiny into a finer net There was still a little
-STORMBRINGER 31
time, but it was running short; and Time the unknown* was
master of all...
The pavilions of Queen Yishaoa and her allies were grouped
thickly about a series of small, wooded hills. The trees
afforded cover from a distance and DO campfires burned to
give away their position. Also the sounds of the great army
were as muted as possible. Outriders went to and fro, reporting
die enemy's positions and keeping wary eyes open for
spies.
. But Eiric and his Imrryrians were unchallenged as they
rode in, for the albino and his men were easily recognisable
and it was well-known that the feared Melnibonean mercocaries
had elected to aid Yishana.
Eiric said to Dyvim Slorm: "I bad best pay my respects to
Queen Yisbana, on account of our old bond, but I do not
want her to know of my wife's disappearance-otherwise she
may try to hinder me. We shall just say that I have come to
aid her, out of friendship."
Dyvim Slorm nodded, and Brie left his cousin to tend to
making camp, while he went at once to Yishana's tent where
the tall queen awaited him impatiently.
The look in her eyes was shielded as he entered. She had a
heavy, sensuous face that was beginning to show signs of ageing.
Her long hair was black and shone around her head. Her
breasts were large and her hips broader than Eiric remembered.
She was sitting in a padded chair and the table before
her was scattered with battle-maps and writing materials,
parchment, ink and quills.
"Good morning, wolf,*' said she with a half-smile that was
at ooce sardonic and provocative. "My scoots reported that
you were riding with your countrymen. This is pleasant Have
you forsaken your new wife to return to subtler pleasures?"
"No,*' he said.
He stripped off his heavy riding cloak and flung it on a
bench. "Good morning, Yishana. You do not change. Fve
half a suspicion that Theleb K'aama gave you a draught of
the waters of Eternal Life before I killed him.**
"Perhaps he did. How goes your marriage?"
**WeU," be said as she moved closer and he felt the warmth
of her body.
"And now Tm disappointed." she smiled ironically and
shrugged. They bad been lovers on different occasions, in
32 Michael Moorcock
spite of the fact that Eiric had been partially responsible for
her brother's death during the raid on Imrryr. Darmit of
Jharkor*s death had put her on tee throne and, being an ambitious
woman, she had not taken the news with too much
sadness. Eiric bad no wish to resume the relationship, however.
He turned immediately to the matter of the forthcoming
battle.
"I see you're preparing for more man a skirmish,** he said.
*"What forces have you and what are your chances of winning?**
There are my own White Leopards,** she told him. "five
hundred picked warriors who run as swiftly as horses, are as
strong as mountain cats and as ferocious as blood-mad
sharks-they are trained to kin and killing is all they know.
Then there are my other troops-infantry and cavalry, some
eighty Lords in command. The best cavalry are from Shazar,
wild riders but clever fighters and well-disciplined. Tarkesh
has sent fewer men since I understand King Hilran needed to
defend his southern borders against a heavy attack. However,
there are almost a thousand and fifty foot-soldiers and some
two hundred mounted men from Tarkesh. In all we can put
perhaps six thousand trained warriors on the field. Serfs,
slaves and the like are also fighting, but they will of course
serve only to meet me initial onslaught and will die in the
early part of the battle."
Eiric nodded. These were standard military tactics. "And
what of the enemy?"
"We have more numbers-but they have Dcva Riders and
hunting tigers. There are also some beasts they keep in
cages-but we cannot guess what they are since me cages are
covered."
"I heard mat me men of Mynhn are flying hither. The import
must be great for them to leave their eyries.**
**If we lose mis battle," she said gravely, "Chaos could easily
engulf the earth and rule over ft. Every oracle from here
to Shazar says the same thing, that Jagreen Lern is but the
tool of less natural masters, that he is aided by the Lords of
Chaos. We we not only fighting for our lands, Eiric, we are
fighting for me human race!"
"Then let us hope we win," he said.
Eiric stood among the captains as they surveyed the mobilising
anny. Tall Dyvim Slonu was by his side, his golden
STORMBRINGER 33
shirt loose on his slim body and his manner confident, arrogant
Also here were hardened soldiers of many smaller campaigns;
short, dark-faced men from Tarkesh with thick armour
and black, oiled hair and beards. The half-naked winged
men from Myynhn had arrived, with their brooding eyes,
hawk-like faces, their great wings folded on their backs,
quiet, dignified, seldom speaking. The Shazariao commanders
were there also, in jackets of grey. brown and black, in rustcoloured
bronze armour. With them stood the captain of
Yishana*s White Leopards, a long-legged, thick-bodied man
with blond hair tied in a knot at the back of his bull-necked
head, silver armour bearing the emblazon of a leopard, albino
like Eiric, rampant and snarling.
The time of the battle was drawing close.. 
Now, in me grey dawn, tee two armies advanced upon
each other* coming from opposite ends of a wide valley.
Banked by low, wooded, hills.
The army of Pan Tang and Dhariior moved, a tide of dark
metal, up the shallow valley to meet them. Eiric, still unarrooured,
watched as they approached, his horse stamping tho
turf. Dyvim Slonn, beside him, pointed and said: "Look-
mere are the plotters-Sarosto on the left and Jagreen Lern
on the rightl**
The leaders headed their army, banners of daik silk rustling
above their helms. King Sarosto and his thin ally,
aquiline Jagreen Lena m glowing scarlet armour that seemed
to be red hot and may have been. On his helm was the Merman
Crest of Pan Tang, for the claimed kinship with the
sea-people. Sarosto's armour was dull, murky yellow, emblazoned
with me Star of Dharijor upon which was the Cleft
Sword which history said was home by Sarosto's ancestor
Atarn the City-Builder.
Behind them, instantly observable, came the Devil Riders
of Pan Tang on their six-legged reptilian mounts, bred by sorcery
it was said. Swarthy and with introspective expressions
on their sharp faces, they carried long, curved sabres, naked
at their belts. Prowling among them came over a hundred
hunting tigers, trained like dogs, with tusk-like teeth and
claws that could rend a roan to the bone with a single sweep.
Beyond the rolling army as it moved towards them, Eiric
could just see the tops of me mysterious cage-wagons. What
weird beasts did they contain, he wondered.
34 Michael Moorcock
Then Yishana shouted a command.
The archers' arrows spread a rattling black cloud above
them as Eiric led the first wave of infantry down the hill to
meet the van of the enemy army. That he should be forced to
risk his life embittered him, but if he was ever to discover
Zarozmia's whereabouts he had to play out his ordered part
and pray that he lived.
The main force of cavalry followed the infantry, flanking it
with orders to encircle the enemy if possible. Brightly dad
Irorryrians and bronze-armoured Shazarians were to one side.
Blue-armoured Tarkeshites with brilliant plumes of red,
purple and white, long lances levelled, and gold-armoured
Jharkorians, longswords already unscabbarded, galloped on
the other side. In the centre of Eiric's advance phalanx loped
Yishana's White Leopards and the queen herself rode beneath
her banner, behind the first phalanx, leading a battalion of
knights.
Down they rushed towards the enemy whose own arrows
rose upwards and then swept down to clash against helmets
or thud into flesh.
Now the sound ot war-shouts smashed through the still
dawn as they streaked down the slopes and clashed.
Eiric found himself confronting lean Jagreen Lern. and the
snarling Theocrat met Stonnbringer's swing with a flame-red
buckler which successfully protected him-proving the shield
to be treated against sorceroua weapons.
Jagreen Lem's features wrinkled into a malicious smile as
he recognised Eiric. "I was told you'd be here, Whiteface. I
know you Eiric and I know your doom!"
*Too many men appear to know my destiny better than I,"
said the albino. "But perhaps if I slay you, Theocrat, I may
force the secret from you before you die?"
"Oh, no! That is not my masters' plan at all."
"Well, mayhap 'tis mine!"
He struck again at Jagreen Lem, but again the blade was
turned, screaming its anger. He felt it move in his hand, felt
it throb with chagrin, for normally the hell-forged blade
could slice through metal however finely tempered.
In Jagreen Lena's gauntleted right hand was a huge war-
axe which he now swung at the unprotected head of Eiric's
horse. This was odd since he was in a position to strike at Eiric
himself. The albino jerked his steed's head to one side,
STORMBRINGER 35
avoided the blow and drove again point firet at Jagreen
Lcro's midriff. The runeblade shrieked as it failed to pierce
the armour. The war-axe swung again and Eiric brought up
his sword as protection but, in astonishment, was driven back
in his saddle by the force of the blow, barely able to control
bis horse, one foot slipping from the stirrup.
Jagreen Lern struck again and successfully split the skull
of Elric*s horse which crumpled to its knees, blood and brains
gushing, great eyes rolling as it died.
Flung from the beast, Eiric rose painfully and readied
himself for Jagreen Lern's next blow. But to his surprise,
the sorcerer-king turned away and moved into the thick of
the battle.
"Sadly your life is not mine to take, Whiteface! That is the
prerogative of other powers. If you live and we are the victors-I
will seek you out, perhaps."
Unable, in his dazed condition, to make sense of this, Eiric
looked desperately around for another horse and saw a Dharijorian
mount, its head and foreparts well protected by dented
black armour, running loose and away from the fight
Swiftly, he leapt for its harness and caught a dangling rein,
steadied the beast, got a foot into a stirrup and swung himself
up in the saddle which was uncomfortable for an unarmoured
man. Standing in the stirrups, Eiric rode it back into
the battle.
He hewed his way through the enemy knights, slaying now
a Devil Rider, now a hunting tiger that lashed at him with
bared fangs, now a gorgeously armoured Dharijorian commander,
now two foot-soldiers who struck at him with halberds.
His horse reared like a monster and. desperately, he
forced it closer to the standard of Yishana until be could see
one of the heralds.
Yishana's army was fighting bravely, but its discipline was
lost It must regroup if it was to be most effective.
"Recall the cavalryF Eiric yelled. "Recall the cflvafryF
The young herald looked up. He was badly pressed by two
Devil Riders. His attention diverted, he was skewered on a
Devil Rider's blade and shrieked as the two men butchered
him.
Cursing. Eiric rode closer and struck one of the attackers
in the side of the head. The man toppled and fell into the
churned mud of the field. The other Rider turned, only to
36 Michael Moorcock
meet howling Stormbringer'a point, and he died yelling, - the
runeblade dranic his soul.
The herald, still mounted, was dead in the saddle, his body
a mass of cuts. Eiric leaned forward, tearing toe bloody horn
from around the corpse's neck. Placing it to his lips, he
sounded the'Cavalry Recall and caught a glimpse of horsemen
turning. Now he saw the standard itself begin to fan and
realised that the standard-bearer was slain. He rose in the
saddle and grasped the pole which bore the bright flag of
Jharkor and, with this in one band, the horn at his Ups, attempted
to rally his forces.
Slowly, the remnants of the battered army gathered around
him. Then Eiric, taking control of the battle, did the only
thing he could-took the sole course of action which might
save the day.
He sounded a long, wailing note on the bom. In response
to this. he heard the beating of heavy wings as the men of
Myyrrhn rose into the air.
Observing this, the enemy released the traps of the mysterious
cages.
Eiric groaned with despair.
A weird hooting preceded the sight of giant owls, thought
extinct even in Myyrrhn the land of their origin, circling skyward.
The enemy had prepared against a threat from the air and,
by some means, had produced the age-old enemies of the
men of Myyrrhn.
Only slightly daunted by this unexpected sight, the men of
Myyrrhn, armed with long spears, attacked the great birds.
The embattled warriors on the ground were showered with
blood and feathers. Corpses of men and birds began to flop
downwards, crushing infantry and cavalry beneath them.
Through this confusion, Eiric and the White Leopards of
Yishana cut their way into the enemy to join up with Dyvim
Slorm and his Imrryrians, the remnants of the Tarkeshite
cavalry/and about a hundred Shazarians. who had survived.
Looking upward. Eiric saw that most of the great owls were
destroyed, but only a handful of the men of Myyrrhn had survived
the fight in the air. These, having done what they could
against the owls, were themselves circling about preparing to
leave the battle. Obviously they realised the hopelessness of it
aU.
STORMBRINGER 37
Eiric cried to Dyvim Slorm as their forces joined: "The
battle's lost-Sarosto and Jagreen Lern rule here now!"
Dyvim Slorm hefted hL longsword in his hand and gave
Eiric a look of assent "If we're to live to keep our destiny.
we'd best make speed away from here!** he cried.
There was little more they could do.
"Zarozinia's life is more important to me than anything
else!" Eiric yelled. "Let's look to our own predicament!"
But the weight of the enemy forces was like a vice, crushing
Eiric and his men. Blood covered Eiric's face from a
blow he had received on the forehead. It clogged his eyes so
that he had to keep raising his left hand to his face to get rid
of the stuff.
His right arm ached as he lifted Stormbringer again and
again, hacking and stabbing about him, desperate now, for although
the dreadful blade had a life, almost an intelligence,
of its own, even it could not supply the vitality which Eiric
needed to remain entirely fresh. In a way he was glad, for be
hated the runesword, (hough he had to depend on the force
which flowed from it to him.
Stormbringer more than slew Elric*s attackers-it drank
(heir souls, and some of that life force was passed on to (he
Melniboneao monarch ...
Now the ranks or the enemy fell back and seemed to open.
Through this self-made breech, animals came running. Animals
with gleaming eyes and red, fang-filled jaws. Animals
with claws.
The hunting tigers of Pan Tang.
Horses screamed as the tigers leapt and rended them, tearing
down mount and man and slashing at the throats of their
victims. The tigers raised bloody snouts and stared around for
a new prey. Terrified, many of Eiric's small force fell back
shouting. Most of the Tarkeshite knights broke and fled the
field, precipitating the flight of the Jharkorians whose maddened
horses bore them away and were soon followed by the
few remaining Shazarians still mounted. Soon only Eiric, his
Imrryrians and about forty White Leopards stood against the
might of DhariJor and Pan Tang.
Eiric raised his horn and sounded the Retreat, wheeled his
black steed about and raced up the valley. Imrryrians behind
him. But me White Leopards fought on to the last- Yishana
had said that they knew nothing but how to kill. Evidently
they also knew how to die.
38 Michael Moorcock
Eiric and Dyvim Slorm led the Imrryrians up the valley,
half-thankful that the white Leopards covered their retreat
The Melnibonean had seen nothing of Yishana since he had
clashed with Jagreen Lera. He wondered what had become of
her.
As they turned a bend in the valley. Brie understood the
foil battle-plan of Jagreen Lern and his ally-for a strong,
fresh force of foot-soldiers and cavalry had assembled at the
other end of the valley, for the purpose of cutting off any retreat
made by bis army.
Scarcely thinking. Eiric urged his horse up the slopes of
the hills, his men following, ducking beneath the low
branches of the birch trees as the Dharijoriana rushed
towards them, spreading out to cut off their escape.
Eiric fumed his horse about and saw that the White Leopards
were still fighting around the standard of Jharkor and
he headed back in that direction, keeping to the hills. Over
the crest of the hills he rode, Dyvim Slorm and a handful of
Imrryrians with him, and then they were galloping for open
countryside while the knights of Dharijor and Pan Tang gave
chase. They had obviously recognised Eiric and wished either
to kill or to capture himAhead
Eiric could see that the Tarkeshites, Shazarians and
Jharkorians who had earlier fled had taken the same route
out as he had. But they no longer rode together, were scatter-
ing away.
Eiric and Dyvim Slorm fled westwards across unknown
country while the other Imrryrians. to take attention off their
leaders, rode to the north east towards Tarkesh and perhaps a
few days of safety.
The battle was won. The minions of evil were the victors
and an age of terror had settled on the lands of the Young
Kingdoms in the west
Some days later, Eiric. Dyvim Slorm, two hnrryrians. a
Tarkeshite commander called Yeda-pad-Juizev, badly wounded
in the side, and a Shazarian foot-soldier, Orion, who had
taken a horse away from the battle, were temporarily safe
from pursuit and were trudging their horses wearily towards
a range of slim-peaked mountains which loomed black
against the red evening sky.
They had not spoken for some hours. Yedn-pad-Juizev was
STORMBRINGER 39
obviously dyine and they could do nothing for him. He knew
this also and expected nothing, merely rode with them for
company. He was very tall for a Tarkeshite, his scarlet pli'me
still bobbing on his dented blue-metal helmet, his breastplate
scarred and smeared with his own blood and others*. His
beard was black and shiny with oil. his nose a juttin? crag on
the rock of his soldier's face, his eyes half-gazed- He was
bearing the pain well. Though they were impatient to reich
the comnarative safety of the mountain range, the others
matched their pace to his, half in respect and half in fascination
that a man could cling to life for so longNight
came and a great yellow moon hung in the sky over
the mountains. The sky was completely clear of cloud and
stars shone brightly. The warriors wished that the night had
been dark. storm-covered, for they could have then soneht
more security in the shadows- As it was the night was lieMed
and they could only hope that they reached the mountains
soon-before the hunting tigers of Pan Tang discovered their
tracks and they died under the rending claws of those dreadful
beasts.
Eiric was in a grim and thoughtful mood. For a while the
Dhariiorian and Pin Tane conauerors would be busy consolidating
their new-won empire. Perhaps there would be quarrels
between them when this was done. perhaps not. But
soon, anyway, they would be very powerful and threatening
the security of other nations on the Southern and Eastern
ContinentsBut
all this, however much it overshadowed the fate of the
whole world, meant little to Eiric for he still could not clearly
see his way to Zarozinia. He remembered the dead creature's
prophecy, part of which had now come about But still it
meant little. He felt as if he were being driven constantly
westwards, as if he must go further and further into the
sparsely-settled lands beyond Jharkor. Was it here his destiny
lay? Was it here that Zarozinia's captors were? Beyond the
ocean brews a battle; Beyond the battle blood shall fall...
Well, had the blood fallen, or was it yet to fall? What waa
the *twin' that EIric's kinsman, Dyvim Slorm, bore? Who was
the one who should not live?
Perhaps the secret lay in the mountains ahead of them?
Beneath the moon they rode, and at last came to a gorge.
40 Michael Moorcock
Half-way along It they located a cave and lay down inside to
rest.
In the morning, Brie was awakened by a sound outside the
cave. Instantly he drew Stonnbringer and crept to the mouth
of the cave. What he saw caused him to sheathe the blade
and call in a soft voice to the battered man who was riding
up the gorge towards the cave. "Here, herald! We are
friends!"
The man was one of Yishana's heralds. His surcoat was in
ribbons, bis armour crumpled on his body. He was swordlesa
and without a helmet, a young man with bis face made gaunt
by weariness and despair. He looked up and relief came
when he recognised Eiric.
"My lord Eiric-they said you were slain on the field."
"I'm glad they did, since that makes pursuit less likely.
Come inside."
The others were awake now-all but one. Yedn-pad-Juizev
had died, sleeping, in the night Orozn yawned and jerked a
thumb at the corpse. "If we do not find food soon. 111 be
tempted to eat our dead friend."
The man looked at Brie for response to this jest, but
seeing the albino's expression be was abashed and retreated to
the depths of the cave grumbling and kicking at loose stones.
Eiric leant against the wall of the cave near the opening.
"What news have you?" he asked.
"Dark news, my lord. From Shazar to Tarkesh black
misery prevails and iron and fire beat across nations like an
unholy storm. We are fully conquered. Only small bands of
men carry on a hopeless struggle against the enemy. Some of
our folk are already talking of turning bandit and preying on
each other, so desperate have times become.**
Eiric nodded. "Such is what happens when foreign allies
are beaten on friendly soil. What of Queen Yishana?"
"She fared ill, my lord. Clad in metal, she battled against a
score of men before expiring-her body torn asunder by the
force of their attack. Sarosto took her bead for a keepsake
and added it to other trophies including the hands of Kamari,
his half-brother who opposed him over the Pan Tang alliance,
the eyes of Peoik of Nargesser, who raised an army against
him in that province. Theocrat Jagreen Lero ordered that all
other prisoners be tortured to death and hanged in chains
STORMBRINGER 41
through the lands as warning against insurrection. They are
an unholy pair, my lordt*
Eiric's mouth grew tight when he heard this. Already h
was becoming clear to him that his only route was westwards,
for the conquerors would soon search him out if he went
back. He turned to Dyvim Slonn. The Imrryrian's shirt was
in raffs and his left arm covered in dried blood.
"Our destiny appears to lie in the west," he said quietly.
"Then let us make speed," said his cousin, "for I am impatient
to get it over and at least learn whether we live or perish
in this enterprise. We gained nothing by our encounter
with the enemy, but wasted time."
"I pained something." Eiric said, remembering his fight
with Jagreen Lern. "I gained the knowledge that Jagreen
Lern is connected in some way with the kidnapping of my
wife-and if he had aught to do with it, I'll claim my vengeance
no matter what."
"Now," said Dyvim Slonn. "Let us make haste to the
west"
Four
They drove deeper into the mountains that day, avoiding the
few hunting parties sent out by the conquerors, but the two
Imrryriaas. recognising that their leaders were on a special
journey, left to go in another direction. The herald was gone
southward to spread his gloomy news so that only Eiric,
Dyvim Slorm and Orozn were left. They did not welcome
Orozn's company, but bore with it for the meanwhile.
Then, after a day, Orozn disappeared and Eiric and Dyvim
Slorm ranged deeper into the black crags, riding through towering.
oppressive canyons or along narrow paths.
Snow lay on the mountains, bright white against sharp
black, filling gorges, making paths slippery and dangerous.
Then one evening they came to a place where the mountains
opened out into a wide valley and they rode, with difficulty
down the foothills of the mountains, their tracks making
great black scars in the snow and their horses steaming, their
breath billowing white in the cold air.
They observed a rider coming across the valley floor
towards them. One rider they did not fear, so they waited for
him to approach. To their surprise it was Orozn, clad in fresh
garments of wolfskin and deer hide. He greeted them in a
friendly manner.
"I have come seeking you both. You must have taken a
more difficult route than mine."
"From where have you come?" Eiric asked; his face was
drawn, his cheek-bones emphasised by the sunken skin. He
looked more like a wolf than ever with his red eyes gleaming.
Zarozinia's fate weighed heavily on his mind.
'There is a settlement nearby. Come, I will take you to it"
They followed Orozn for some way and it was getting near
nightfall, the setting sun staining the mountains scarlet, when
they reached the opposite side of the valley, dotted with a
few birch trees and, further up, a cluster of firs.
42
STORMBRINGER
Orozn led them into this grove.
43
They came screaming out of the dark. a dozen swarthy
men. possessed by hatred-and something else. Weapons
were raised in mailed hands. By their armour, these men
were from Pan Tang. Orozn must have been captured and
persuaded to lead Eiric and his cousin into ambush.
Eiric turned his horse, rearing.
"Orozn! You betrayed us!"
But Orozn was riding. .He looked back once, his pale face
tortured with guilt. Then his eyes darted away from Eiric and
Dyvim Slorm and he frowned, rode down the moss-wet hill
back into the howling darkness of the night
Eiric lifted Stormbringer from his belt, gripped the hut,
blocked a blow from a brass-studded mace, slid his sword
down the handle and sheared off his attacker's fingers. He
and Dyvim Slorm were soon surrounded, yet he fought on,
Stormbringer shrilling a wild, lawless song of death.
But Eiric and Dyvim Slorm were still weak from the
rigours of their past adventures. Not even Stormbringer's evil
strength was sufficient fully to revitalise Eiric's deficient veins
and he was filled with fear-sot of the attackers, but of the
fact that he was doomed to die or be captured. And he had
the feeling that these warriors had no knowledge of their
master's pan in the matter of the prophecy, did not realise
that, perhaps, he was not meant to die at that moment
In fact he decided, as he battled, a great mistake was
about to be perpetrated ...
"AriochI" he cried in his fear to the demon-god of Melnibone.
"Arioch! Aid me! Blood and souls for thine aidi"
But that intractable entity sent no aid.
Dyvim Slorm's long blade caught a man Just below bis gorget
and pierced him through the throat The other Pan Tang
horsemen threw themselves at him but were driven back by
his sweeping sword. Dyvim Slorm shouted: "Why do we worship
such a god when whim decides him so often?"
"Perhaps he thinks our time has come!" Eiric yelled back
as his runeblade drank another foe's life-force.
Tiring fast, they fought on until a new sound broke above
the clash of arms-the sound of chariots and low, moaning
cries.
Then they were sweeping into the ml6e black men with
handsome features and thin, proud mouths, their magnificent
44 Michael Moorcock
bodies half-naked as their cloaks of white fox fur streamed
behing them and their javelins were flung with terrible a&-
curacy at the bewildered men of Pan Tang.
Eiric sheathed his sword and remained ready to fight or
flee. "This is the one-the white-faced one!" cried a black
charioteer as he saw Eiric. The chariots rolled to a halt, tall
horses stamping and snorting. Eiric rode up to the leader.'
"I am grateful," he said, half falling from his saddle in
weariness. He turned the droop of his shoulders into a bow.
"You appear to know me-you are the third I've met while
on this quest who recognises me without my being able to return
the compliment."
The leader tugged the fox cape about his naked chest and
smiled with his thin lips. "I'm named Sepiriz and you will
know me soon enough. As for you, we have known of you
for thousands of years. Eiric are you not-last king of Melnibone?"
"That is true."
"And you," Sepiriz addressed Dyvhn Slorm. "are Eiric's
cousin. Together you represent the last of the pure line of
Melnibone.**
"Aye," Dyvim Slorm agreed, curiosity in his eyes.
"Then we have been waiting for you to pass this way.
There was a prophecy..."
"You are the captors of Zarozinia?** Eiric reached for his
sword.
Sepiriz shook his head. "No, but we can tell you where she
is. Calm yourself. Though I realise the agony of mind you
must be suffering, I will be better able to explain all I know
back in our own domain."
"First tell us who you are," Eiric demanded.
Sepiriz smiled slightly. "You know us. I think-or at least
you know of us. There was a certain friendship between your
ancestors and our folk in the early years of the Bright Em-
pire." He paused a moment before continuing: "Have you
ever heard legends, in Irorryr perhaps, of the Ten from the
mountain? The ten who sleep in the mountain of fire?"
"Many times." Eiric drew in his breath. "Now I recognise
you by description. But it is said that you sleep for centuries
in the mountain of fire. Why are you roaming abroad in this
manner?"
"We were driven by an eruption from our volcano home
which had been dormant for two thousand years. Such moveSTORMBRINGER
45
menta of nature have been taking place an over the earth of
late. Our time, we knew, had come to awaken again. We
were servants of Fate-and our mission is strongly bound up
with your destiny. We bear a message for you from Zarozinia's
captor-and another from a different source. Would
you return now, with us, to the Chasm of Nihrain xnd learn
alt we can tell you?"
Eiric pondered for a moment, then he lifted his white face
and said: "I am in haste to claim vengeance, Sepiriz. But if
what you can tell me will lead me closer to claiming it. 111
come."
Then come!" The black giant Jerked the reins of his horse
and turned the chariot about
It was a journey of a day and a night to the Chasm of
Nihrain, a huge gaping fissure high in the mountains, a place
avoided by all; it had supernatural significance for those who
dwelt near the mountains.
The lordly Nihrain conversed little on the Journey and at
last they were above the Chasm, driving their chariots down
the steep path which wound into its dark depths.
About half a mile down no light penetrated, but they saw
ahead of them flickering torches that illuminated part of the
carved outline of an unearthly mural or betrayed a gaping
opening in the solid rock. Then, as they guided their horses
down further, they saw, in detail, the awe-inspiring city of
Nihrain which outsiders had not glimpsed for many centuries.
The last of the Nihrain now lived here; ten immortal men of
a race older even than that of Memibone which had a history
of twenty thousand years.
Huge columns rose above mem, hewn ages before from the
living rock, giant statues and wide balconies, many-tiered.
Windows a hundred feet high and sweeping steps cut into the
face of the chasm. The Ten drove their yellow chariots
through a mighty gate and into the caverns of Nihrain.
carved to their entire extent with strange symbols and
Uranger murals. Here slaves, wakened from a sleep of centuries
to tend their masters, ran forward. Even these did not
fully bear resemblance to the men that Eiric knew.
Sepiriz gave the reins to a slave as Eiric and Dyvim Slorm
dismounted, staring about them in aweHe
said: "Now-to my own chambers and there ITl in-
46 Michael Moorcock
form you of what you wish to know-and what you must
do."
Led by Sepiriz, the kinsmen stalked impatiently through
galleries and into a large chamber full of dark sculpture. A
number of fires burned behind this hall, in big grates. Sepiriz
folded his great body into a chair and bade them sit in two
similar chairs, carved from solid blocks of ebony. When they
were all seated before one of the fires, Sepiriz took a long
breath, staring around the hall, perhaps remembering its earlier
history.
Somewhat angered by this show of casualness, Eiric said
impatiently: "Forgive me, Sepiriz-but you promised to pass
on your message to us."
"Yes," Sepiriz said, "but so much do I have to tell you that
I must pause one moment to collect my thoughts." He settled
himself in the chair before continuing.
"We know where your wife, is," he said at last, "and know
also that she is safe. She will not be harmed since she is to be
bargained for something which you possess."
"Then tell me the whole story," Eiric demanded bleakly.
"We were friendly with your ancestors. Eiric. And we were
friendly with those they superseded, the ones who forged that
blade you bear."
Eiric was interested in spite of his anxiety. For years he
had attempted to rid himself of the runesword, but had never
succeeded. All his efforts had failed and he still needed to
carry it, although drugs now gave him most of his strength.
"Would you be rid of your sword, Eiric?" Sepiriz said.
"Aye-it's well known."
"Then listen to this tale.
"We know for whom and for what the blade-and its
twin-were forged. They were made for a special purpose
and for special men. Only Melniboneans may carry them,
and of those only the blood of the royal line."
"There is no hint of any special purpose for the swords in
Melnibonean history or legend," Eiric said leaning forward.
"Some secrets are best kept fully guarded," Sepiriz said
calmly. "Those blades were forged to destroy a group of very
powerful beings. Among them are the Dead Gods."
The Dead Gods-but, by their very name, you must
know that they perished long ages ago."
"They 'perished* as you say. In human terms they are
dead. But they chose to die, chose to rid themselves of
STORMB RINGER 47
material shape and hurled their life-stuff into the blackness of
eternity, for in those days they were full of fear."
Eiric had DO real conception of what Sepiriz described but
he accepted what the Nihrainian said and listened on.
"One of them has returned," Sepiriz said.
Whyr
"To get, at any cost, two things which endanger him and
his fellow gods-wherever they may be they can still be
harmed by these things.'*
"They are... ?"
They have the earthly appearance of two swords, runecarved
and sorcerous-Moumblade and Stormbringer."
Thisr Eiric touched his blade. "Why should the gods fear
this? And the other went to Limbo with my cousin Yyrkoon
whom I killed many years ago. It is lost"
"That is not true. We recovered it-that was part of Fate's
purpose for us. We have it here in Nihrain. The blades were
forged for your ancestors who drove the Dead Gods away by
means of them. They were made by other uohuman smiths
who were also enemies of the Dead Gods. These smiths were
compelled to combat evil with evil, although they, themselves,
were not pledged to Chaos, but to Law. They forged the
swords for several reasons-ridding the world of the Dead
Gods was but one!"
The other reasons?"
Those you shall learn in times to come-for our relationship
will not be ended until the whole destiny has been
worked out We are obliged not to reveal the other reasons
until the proper time. You have a dangerous destiny, Eiric,
and I do not envy it"
"But what is the message you have?" Eiric said impatiently.
"Due to the disturbance created by Jagreen Lern, one of
the Dead Gods has been enabled to return to earth, as I told
you. He has gathered acolytes about him. They kidnapped
your wife."
Eiric felt a mood of deep despair creep over him. Must he
defy such power as this?
"Why... ?" he whispered.
"Darnizhaan is aware that Zarozinia is important to you.
He wishes to barter her for the two swords. We, in this matter,
are merely messengers. We must give up the sword we
keep at the request of you or Dyvim Slorm, for they right-
48 Michael Moorcock
folly belong to any of the royal line. Damizhaan's terms are
simple. He will dispatch Zarozinia to Limbo unles you give
him the blades which threaten bis existence. Her death, it
would not be death as we know it, would be unpleasant and
eternal."
"And if I agreed to do that, what would happen?"
"All the Dead Gods would return. Only the power of the
swords keeps them from doing so now!"
"And what would happen if the Dead Gods came back?"
"Even without the Dead Gods, Chaos threatens to conquer
the planet, but with them it would be utterly invincible, its
effect immediate. Evil would sweep the worid. Chaos would
plunge this earth into a stinking inferno of terror and destruction.
You have already had a taste of what is happening, and
Damizhaan has only been back for a short time."
"You mean the defeat of Yishana's armies and the conquest
by Sarosto and Jagreeo Lero?"
"Exactly. Jagreen Lem has a pact with Chaos-all the
Lords of Chaos, not merely the Dead Gods-for Chaos fears
Fate's plan for earth's future and would attempt to tamper
with it by gaining domination of our planet The Lords of
Chaos are strong enough without the help of the Dead Gods.
Damizhaan must be destroyed.**
"I have an impossible choice, Sepiriz. If I give up
Stonnbringer I can probably survive on herbs and the like.
But if I do give it up for Zarozinia, then Chaos will be unleashed
to its full extent and I will have a monstrous crime
upon my conscience.**
"The choice is yours alone to make.**
Eiric deliberated but could think of no way of solving the
problem.
"Bring the other Made," he said at last.
Sepiriz rejoined them a while later, with a scabbarded
sword that seemed little different from Stormbriager.
"So, Eiric-is the prophecy explained?" he asked, still
keeping hold of Moumblade.
"Aye-here is the twin of that I bear. But the last partwhere
are we to go?"
"I wiB tell you in a moment Though the Dead Gods, and
the powers of Chaos, are aware that we possess the sister
blade, they do not know whom we really serve. Pate, as I
told you, is our master, and Fate has wrought a fabric for
yrORMBKIN GER 49
this earth which would be hard to alter. But it could be altered
and we are entrusted to see that Fate is not cheated.
You are about to undergo a test How you fare in it, what
your decision is, will decide what we must tell you upon your
return to Nihrain."
"You wish me to return here?"
"Yes.**
"Give me Moumblade," Eiric said quickly.
Sepiriz handed him the sword and Eiric stood there with
one twin blade in each hand, as if weighing something between
them.
Both blades seemed to moan in recognition aod their powers
swam through his body so that he seemed to be built of
steel-hard fire.
"I remember now that I hold them both that their powers
are greater than I realise. There is one quality they possess
when paired, a quality we may be able to use against this
Dead God." He frowned. "But more of that in a moment."
He stared sharply at Sepiriz. "Now tell me, where is Damizhaan?"
"The Vale of Xanyaw in Myyrrhn!"
Eiric handed Moumblade to Dyvim Slorm who accepted it
gingerly.
"What will your choice be?" Sepiriz asked.
"Who knows?" Eiric said with bitter gaiety. "Perhaps there
is a way to beat this Dead God ...
"But I tell you this, Sepiriz-given the opportunity I shall
make that God rue his homecoming, for he has done the one
thing that can move me to real anger. And the anger of Eiric
of Melnibone and his sword Stonnbringer can destroy the
world!"
Sepiriz rose from his chair, his eyebrows lifting.
"And gods, Eiric, can it destroy gods?"
Five
Eiric rode like a giant scarecrow, gaunt and rigid on the massive
back of the Nihramian steed. His grim face was set fast
in a mask that hid emotion and his crimson eyes burned like
coals in their sunken socket*. The wind whipped his hair this
way and that, but he sat straight, staring ahead, one long-fingered
hand gripping Stonnbringer's hilt.
Occasionally Dyvim Slonn, who bore Moumblade both
proudly and warily, heard the blade moan to its sister and felt
it shudder at his side. Only later did he begin to ask himself
what the blade might make him, what it would give him and
demand of him. After that, he kept his hand away from it as
much as possible.
Close to the borders of Myyrrhn, a pack of Dharijorian
hirelings-native Jharkorians in the livery of their conquerors-came
upon them. Unsavoury louts they were, who
should have known better than to ride across EIric's path.
They steered their horses towards the pair, grinning. The
black plumes of their helmets nodded, armour straps creaked
and metal clanked. The leader, a squint-eyed bully with an
axe at his belt, pulled his mount short in front of Eiric.
At a direction from its master, the albino's horse came to a
stop. His expression unchanged, Eiric drew Stonnbringer in
an economic, catlike gesture. Dyvim Slonn copied him, eyeing
the silently laughing men. He was surprised at how easily
the blade sprang from its scabbard.
Then, with no challenges, Eiric began to fight
He fought like an automaton, quickly, efficiently, expressionlessly,
cleaving the leader's shoulder plate in a stroke
that cut through the man from shoulder to stomach in one
raking movement which peeled back armour and flesh, rupturing
the body so that a great scarlet gash appeared in the
black metal and the leader wept as he slowly died, sprawling
50
STORMBRINGER 51
for a moment over his horse before slumping from the
mount one leg high. caught in a stirrup strap.
Stonnbringer let out a great metallic purr of pleasure and
Eiric directed arm and blade about him, emofionlessly slaving
the horsemen as if they were unarmed and chained, so little
chance did they have.
Dyvim Slonn unused to the semi-sentient Moumblade,
tried to wield her like an ordinary sword but she moved in
his hand, making cleverer strokes than he. A peculiar sense
of power, at once sensual and cool poured into him and he
heard his voice veiling exultantly, realised what his ancestors
must have been like in war.
The fight was quickly done with and leaving the souldrained
corpses on the ground behind them, they were soon
in the land of Myyrrhn. Both blades had now been commonly
blooded.
Eiric was now better able to think and act coherently, but
he could spare nothing for Dyvim Slonn while intratempor"
ally asking nothing of his cousin who rode at his side, frustrated
in that he was not called upon for his help.
Eiric let his mind drift about in time, encompassing past,
present and future and forming it into a whole-a pattern.
He was suspicious of pattern, disliking shape, for he did not
trust it. To him. life was chaotic, chance-dominated, unpredictable.
It was a trick, an illusion of the mind, to be able to
see a pattern to it.
He knew a few things, judged nothing.
He knew he bore a sword which physically and pyschologically
he needed to bear. It was an unalterable admission of a
weakness in him, a lack of confidence in either himself or the
philosophy of cause and effect. He believed himself a realist
Through the bleak night they rode, buffeted by a vicious
wind.
And as they came closer to the Vale of Xanyaw, the whole
sky, the earth, the air became filled with heavy, throbbing
music. Melodious, sensual, great chords of sound, on and on
it rose and fell, and following it came me white-faced ones.
Each had a black cowl and a sword which split at the end
into three curved barbs. Each grinned a fixed grin. The music
followed them as they came running like mad things at the
two men who reined in their horses, restraining the urge to
turn and flee. Eiric had seen horrors in his life, ,had seen
52
Michael Moorcock
much that would make others insane, but for some reason
these shocked him more deeply than any. They were men, ordinary
men by the look of them-but men possessed by an
unholy spirit
Prepared to defend themselves, Eiric and Dyvim Slonn
drew their blades and waited for the encounter, but none
came. The music and the men rushed past them and away
beyond them in the direction from which they had come.
Overhead, suddenly, they heard the beat of wings, a shriek
from out of the sky and a ghastly wail. Fleeing, two women
rushed by and Eiric was disturbed to sec that the women
were from the winged race of Myyrrhn, but were wingless.
These, unlike a woman Eiric remembered, had had their
wings deliberately hacked off. They paid no attention to the
two riders, but disappeared, running into the night, their eyes
blank and their faces insane.
"What is happening, Eiric?" cried Dyvim Slorm, resheathing
bis mneblade, his other hand striving to control the
prancing horse.
"I know not What does happen in a place where the Dead
Gods' rule has come back?"
All was rushing noise and confusion; the night was full of
movement and terror.
"Come!" Eiric slapped bis sword against his mount's rump
and sent the beast into a jerking gallop, forcing himself and
the steed forward into the terrible night
Then mighty laughter greeted them as they rode between
hills into the Vale of Xanyaw. The valley was pitch-black; and
alive with menace, the very hills seeming sentient They
slowed theif pace as they lost their sense of direction, and Eiric
had to call to his unseen cousin, to make sure he was still
close. The echoing laughter sounded again, roaring from out
of the dark, so that the earth shook. It was as if the whole
planet laughed in ironic mirth at their efforts to control their
fears and push on through the valley.
Eiric wondered if he had been betrayed and this was a trap
set by the Dead Gods. What proof had he that Zarozina was
here? Why had he trusted Sepiriz? Something slithered
against his leg as it passed him and he put his hand on the
hilt of his sword, ready to draw it
But then, shooting upwards into the dark sky, there arose,
seemingly from the very earth, a huge figure which barred
their way. Hands on hips, wreathed in golden light, a face of
53
STORMBRINGER
an ape, somehow blended with another shape to give it dignity
and wild grandeur, its body alive and dancing with
colour and light, its lips grinning with delight and
knowledge-Damizhaan, the Dead Godt
"Finer
"Darnizhaan!" cried Eiric fiercely, craning his head to stare
up at the Dead God's face. He felt no fear now. "I have
come for my wife!"
Around the Dead God's heels appeared acolytes with wide
lips and pale, triangular faces, conical caps on their heads
and madness in their eyes. They giggled and shrilled and
shivered in the light of Damizhaan*s grotesque and beautiful
body. They gibbered at the two riders and mocked them, but
,. they did not move away from the Dead God's heels.
^ Eiric sneered. "Degenerate and pitiful minions." he said.
If "Not so pitiful as you, Eiric of Melnibon6." laughed the
^ Dead God. "Have you come to bargain, or to give your
f wife's soul into my custody, so that she may spend eternity
s dying?"
"' Eiric did not let his hate show on his face.
"I would destroy you; it is instinctive for me to do so.
But-**
The Dead God smiled, almost with pity. "You roust be
destroyed, Eiric. You are an anachronism. Your Time is
gone.'*
"Speak for yourself, Darnizhaan!"
"I could destroy you."
"But you will not." Though passionately hating the being,
Eric also felt a disturbing sense of comradeship for the Dead
God. Both of them represented an age that was gone; neither
were really part of the new earth.
Then I wfll destroy her." the Dead God said. "That I
could do with impunity."
"Zarozinia! Where is she?"
Once again Damizhaan's mighty laughter shook the Vale
of Xanyaw. *'0h, what have the old folk come to? There was
a time when no man of Melnibon6, particularly of the royal
line, would admit to caring for another mortal soul, especially
if they belonged to the beast-race, the new race of the age
you call that of the Young Kingdoms. What? Are you mating
with animals. King of Melnibon6? Where is your blood, your
cruel and brilliant blood? Where the glorious malice? Where
Ac evil. Eiricr*
54
Michael Moorcock
Peculiar emotions stirred in Eiric as he remembered hfs ancestors,
the sorcerer emperors of the Dragon Isle. He realised
that the Dead God was deliberately awakening these emotions
and, with an effort, be refused to let them dominate
him.
*That is past,** he shouted, "a new time has come upon the
earth. Our time wifl soon be gone-and yours is over/**
"No, Eiric. Mark my words, whatever happens. The dawn
is over and will soon be swept away like dead leaves before
the wind of morning. The earth's history has not even begun.
You, your ancestors, these men of the new races even, you
are nothing but a prelude to history. You will all be forgotten
if the real history of the world begins. But we can avert
that-we can survive, conquer the earth and hold it against
the Lords of Law, against Fate herself, against the Cosmic
Balance-we can continue to live, but you must give me the
awords!**
"I fail to understand you," Eiric said, his lips thin and his
teeth tight in his skull. "I am here to bargain or do battle for
my wife."
"You do not understand," the Dead God guffawed, **becausc
we are all of us, gods and men, but shadows pl&ying
puppet parts before the true play begins. You would best not
fight me-rather side with me, for I know the truth. We
share a common destiny. We do not, any of us, exist The old
folk are doomed, you, myself and my brothers, unless you
give me the swords. We must not fight one another. Share
our frightful knowledge-the knowledge that turned us insane.
There is nothing. Eiric-no past, present, or future. We
do not exist, any of usF
Eiric shook his head quickly. "I do not understand you.
still. I would not understand you if I could. I desire only the
return of my wife-not baffling conundrums!"
Damizhaan laughed again. "No! You shall not have the
woman unless we are given control of the swords. You do
not realise their properties. They were not only designed to
destroy us or exile us-their destiny is to destroy the world as
we know it If you retain them, Eiric, you will be responsible
for wiping out your own memory for those who come after
you."
"I'd welcome that," Eiric said,
Dyvim SIorm remained silent, not altogether in sympathy
STORMBRINGER.
55
with Eiric. The Dead God's argument seemed to contain
truth.
Damizhaan shook his body so that the golden light danced
and its area widened momentarily. "Keep the swords and all
of us will be as we had never existed," he said impatiently.
"So be it," Elric*s tone was stubborn, "do you think I wish
the memory to live on-the memory of evil, ruin and
destruction? The memory of a man with deficient blood in his
veins-a man called Friendslayer, Woman-slayer and many
other such names?"
Damizhaan spoke urgently, almost in terror. "Eiric, you
have been duped! Somewhere you have been given a conscience.
You must join with us. Only if the Lords of Chaos
can establish their reign will we survive. If they fail, we shall
' be obliterated!"
^ "Goodr
\ "Limbo, Eiric. Limbo! Do you understand what that
'<- means?"
. "1 do not care- Where is my wife?"
; Eiric blocked the truth from his mind, blocked out the terror
in the meaning of the Dead God's words. He could not
afford to listen or fully to comprehend. He must save Zarozinia.
"I have brought the swords," said he, "and wish my wife to
be returned to me."
"Very well," the Dead God smiled hugely in his relief. "At
least if we keep the blades, in their true shape, beyond the
earth, we may be able to retain control of the world. In your
hands they could destroy not only us but you, your world, all
that you represent. Beasts would rule the earth for millions of
years before the age of intelligence began again. And it
would be a duller age than this. We do not wish it to occur.
But if you had kept the swords, it would have come about almost
inevitably!"
"Oh. be silent!" Eiric cried. "For a god, you talk too much.
Take the swords-and give me back my wife!"
At the Dead God's command, some of the acolytes scampered
away. Eiric saw their gleaming bodies disappear into
the darkness. He waited nervously until they returned, carrying
the struggling body of Zarozinia. They set her on the
ground and Eiric saw that her face bore the blank look of
hock.
"Zaroziniaf
56
Michael Moorcock
The giri*s eyea roamed about before they saw Eiric. She began
to move towards him* but the acolytes held her bade, giggling.
Darnizhaan stretched forward two gigantic, glowing hands.
"The swords first.*'
Biric and Dyvim Slorm put them into his hands. The Dead
God straightened up, clutching his prizes and roaring his
mirth. ZarozJnia was now released and she ran forward to
grasp her husband's hand, weeping and trembling. Eiric leant
down and stroked her hair. too disturbed to say anything.
Then he turned to Dyvim Slorffl, shouting: "Let us see if
our plan will work, cousin!"
Eiric stared up at Stormbringer writhing in Daraizhaan*8
grasp. "Stormbringer! Kerana soliem, o'glara . . .**
Dyvim Slorm also called to Moumblade in the Ancient
Tongue of Melnibone, the mystic, sorcerous tongue which
had been used for rune-casting and demon-raising all through
Melnibone's twenty thousand years of history.
Together, they commanded the blades, as if they were actually
wielding them in their hands, so that merely by
shouting orders, Eiric and Dyviro Slorm began their work.
This was the remembered quality of born blades when paired
in a common fight The blades twisted in Darnizhaan's glowing
hands. He started backwards, his shape faltering, some-
times manlike, sometimes beastlike, sometimes totally alien.
But he was evidently horrified, this god.
Now the swords wrenched themselves from the clutching
hands and turned on him. He fought against them, fending
them off as they wove about io the air, whining malevolently,
triumphantly, attacking him with vicious power. At Eiric's
command, Stormbringer slashed at the supernatural being
and Dyvim Slorm's Moumblade followed its example. Because
the ruaeblades were also supernatural, Darnizhaan was
harmed dreadfully whenever they struck his form.
"Eiric!" he raved, "Eiric-you do not know what you are
doing! Stop them! Stop them; You should have listened more
carefully to what I told you. Stop them!"
But Eiric in his hate and malice urged on the blades, made
them plunge into the Dead God's being time after time so
that his shape sometimes faltered, faded, the colours of its
bright beauty dulling. The acolytes fled upwards into the vale,
convinced that their lord was doomed. Their lord, also, was
so convinced. He made one lunge towards the mounted men
STORMBRINGER 57
and then the fabric of his being began to shred before the
blades* attack; wisps of his body-stuff seemed to break away
and drift into the air to be swallowed by the black night
Viciously and ferociously, Eiric goaded the blades while
Dyvim Slorm's voice blended with his in a cruel joy to see
die bright being destroyed.
"Foolsr he screamed, "in destroying me, you destroy
yourselvesf*
But Eiric did not listen and at last there was nothing left of
the Dead God and the swords crept back to lie contentedly in
their masters' hands.
Quickly, with a sudden shudder, Eiric scabbarded Stormbringer.
He dismounted and helped his girl-wife on to the back of
his great stallion and then swung up into the saddle again. It
was very quiet in the Vale of Xanyaw.
Six
Three people, bent in their saddles with weariness, reached
the Chasm of Nihrain days later. They rode down the twisting
paths into the black depths of the mountain city and
were there welcomed by Sepiriz whose face was grave.
though his words were encouraging.
"So you were successful, Eiric,*' he said with a small smile.
Eiric paused while he dismounted and aided Zarozinia
down. He turned to Sepriz. "I am not altogether satisfied with
this adventure," he said grimly, "though I did what I had to
in order to save my wife. I would speak with you privately,
Sepiriz."
The black Nihrainian nodded gravely. "When we have
eaten," he said, "we will talk alone."
They walked wearily through the galleries,, noting that
there was considerably more activity in the city now, but
there was no sign of Sepiriz's nine brothers. He explained
their absence as he led Eiric and his companions towards his
own chamber. "As servants of Fate they have been called to
another plane where they can observe something of the
several different possible futures of the earth and thus keep
me informed of what I must do here."
They entered the chamber and found food ready and,
when they had satisfied their hunger, Dyvim Slonn and Zarozinia
left the other two.
The fire from the great hearth blazed. Eiric and Sepiriz sat
together, unspeakiog, hunched in their chairs.
At last, without preamble, Eiric told Sepiriz the story of
what had happened, what he remembered of the Dead God's
words, how they had disturbed him-even struck him as
being true.
When he had finished, Sepiriz nodded. "It is so,** he said.
"Darnizhaan spoke the truth- Or, at least, he spoke most of
the truth, as he understood it."
58
STORMBRINGER 59
"You mean we win all soon cease to exist? That it will be
as if we had never breathed, or thought, or fought?"
That is likely."
"But why? It seems unjust."
nvho told you that the worid was just?**
Eiric smiled, his own suspicions confirmed. "Aye, as I expected,
there is no Justice."
"But there fa," Sepiriz said, -Justice of a kind-Justice
which must be carved from the chaos of existence. Man was
not born to a world of justice. But he can create such a
world!**
*Td agree to that," Eiric said, "but what are all our strivinga
for if we are doomed to die and the results of our actions
with us?"
"That is not absolutely the case. Something wffl continue.
Those who come after us will inherit something from us."
"What is that?"
"An earth free of the major forces of Chaos.**
"You mean a world free of sorcery, I presume ...?**
"Not entirely free of sorcery, but chaos and sorcery wffl
not dominate the world of the future as it does this world.**
"Then that is worth striving for, Sepiriz," Eiric said almost
with relief. "But what part do the runeblades play in the
scheme of things?"
"They have two functions. One, to rid this world of the
great dominating sources of evil-**
"But they are evil. themselvesi"
"Just so. It takes a strong evil to battle a strong evfl. The
days mat will come will be when the forces of good can overcome
those of evil. They are not yet strong enough. That, as
I told you, is what we must strive for."
"And what is the other purpose of the blades?"
"That is their final purpose-your destiny. I can ten you
now. I must ten you now, or let you live out your destiny unknowing."
"Then teU me,*' Eiric said impatiently.
"Their ultimate purpose is to destroy this world!"
Eiric stood up. "Ah, no, Sepiriz. That I cannot believe.
ShaH I have such a crime on my conscience?"
"It is not a crime, it is in the nature of wings. The era of
the Bright Empire, even that of the Young Kingdoms, is
drawing to a close. Chaos formed mis earth and, for aeons,
Chaos ruled. Men were created to put an end to that rule."
60 Michael Moorcock
"But my ancestors worshipped the powers of Chaoc. My
patron demon, Arioch, is a Duke of Hell, one of the prime
Lords of Chaos!"
"Just so. You, and your ancestors, were not true men at
all, but an intermediary type created for a purpose. You understand
Chaos as no true men ever could understand it You
can control the forces of Chaos as no true men ever could.
And, as a manifestation of the champion Eternal, you can
weaken die forces of Chaos-for you know the qualities of
Chaos. Weaken them is what you have done. Though worshipping
the Lords of Chance, your race were the first to
bring some kind of order to the earth. The people of the
Young Kingdoms have inherited this from you-and have
consolidated it. But, as yet. Chaos is still that much stronger.
The runeblades, Stormbringer and Mournblade, this more orderly
age, the wisdom your race and mine have gained, all
will go towards creating the basis for the true beginnings of
Mankind's history. That history wBl not begin for many thousands
of years, the type may take on a lowlier form, become
more beastlike before it re-evolves, but when it does, it will
re-evolve into a world bereft of the stronger forces of Chaos.
It will have a fighting chance. We are all doomed, but they
need not be."
"So that is what Damizhaan meant when be said we were
just puppets, acting out our parts before me true play began
. . ." EIric sighed deeply, the weight of his mighty responsibnity
was heavy on his soul. He did not welcome it; but he
accepted it
Sepiriz said gently: "It is your purpose, EIric of Melnibon6.
Hitherto, your life has appeared comparatively mean*
ingless. All through it you have been searching for some
purpose for living, is that not true?"
"Aye,** EIric agreed with a slight smile, "Fve been restless
for many a year since my birth; restless the more between the
time when Zarozinia was abducted and now."
"It is fitting that you should have been,** Sepiriz said, "for
there is SL purpose for you-Fate's purpose. It is this destiny
that you have sensed all your mortal days. You, the last of
the royal line of Melnibone, must complete your destiny in
the times which are to follow closely upon these. The world
is darkening-nature revolts and rebels against the abuses to
which the Lords of Chaos put it. Oceans seethe and forests
sway, hot lava spills from a thousand mountains, winds shriek
STORMBRINGER 61
their angry torment and the skies are full of awful movement.
Upon the face of the earth, warriors are embattled in a
struggle which will decide the fate of the world, linked as the
struggle is, with greater conflicts among Gods. Women and
little children die on a million funeral pyres upon this continent
alone. And soon the conflict will spread to me next
continent and the next Soon all the men of the earth will
have chosen sides and Chaos might easily win. It would win
but for one thing: you and your sword Stormbringer."
"Stormbringer. It has brought enough storms for me. Perhaps
this time it can calm one. And what if Law should
win?"
"And if Law should win-then that, too, will mean the decline
and death of this world-we shall all be forgotten. But
if Chaos should win-then doom will cloud the very air, agony
will sound in the wind and foul misery will dominate a
plunging, unsettled worid of sorcery and evil hatred. But you,
EIric, with your sword and our aid, could stop this. It must
be done."
"Then let it be done," EIric said quietly, "and if it must be
done-then let it be done well.**
Sepiriz said: "Annies will soon be marshalled to drive
against Pan Tang's might These must be our first defence.
Thereafter, we shall call upon you to fulfil the rest of your
destiny."
"ni play my part, willingly," EIric replied, "for. whatever
else, I have a mind to pay the Theocrat back for his insults
and the inconvenience be has caused me. Though perhaps be
didn't instigate Zarozinia's abduction, he aided those who did,
and he shall die slowly for that"
"Go then, speedily, for each moment wasted allows the
Theocrat to consolidate further his new-won empire."
"Farewell," said EIric, now more than ever anxious to
leave Nihrain and return to familiar lands. "I know well
meet again, Sepiriz, but I pray it be in calmer times than
these."
Now the three of them rode eastwards, towards the coast
of Tarkesh where they hoped to find a secret ship to take
them across the Pale Sea to luniora and thence to Karlaak by
the Weeping Waste. They rode their magical Nihrain horses,
careless of danger, through a war-wasted worid, strife-ruined
and miserable under the heel of the Theocrat
62 Michael Moorcock
Eiric and Zarozima exchanged many glances, but they did
not speak much, for they were both moved by a knowledge
of something which they could not speak of, which they
dared not admit She knew they would not have much time
together even when they returned to Kariaak, die saw that he
grieved and she grieved also, unable to understand the change
that had come upon her husband, only aware that the black
sword at his side would never, now, hang in (he armoury
again. She felt she had failed him, though this was not the
case.
As they topped a hut and saw smoke drifting* black and
thick across the plains of Toraunz, once beautiful, now ruined*
Dyvim Slorm shouted from behind Eiric and his bride:
"One thing, cousin-whatever happens, we must have vengeance
on the Theocrat and bis ally."
Eiric pursed his Ups.
"Aye,** he said, and glanced again at Zarozima whose 'eyes
were downcast.
Now the Western lands from Taikesh to Myyrrfm were
sundered by the servitors of Chaos. Was this truly to be the
final conflict that would decide whether Law or Chaos would
dominate the future? The forces of Law were weak and scattered.
Could this possibly be the final paroxysm on earth of
the great Lords of Eva? Now, between armies, one part of
the world's fate was being decided. The lands groaned in the
torment of bloody conflict
What other forces must Eiric fight before he accomplished
his final destiny and destroyed the worid he knew. What else
before the horn of fate was blown-to herald in the night?
Sepiriz, no doubt, would tell him when the time came.
But meanwhile more material scores had to be settled. The
lands to the east must be made ready for war. The sealords
of the Purple Ports must be approached for aid, the kings of
the south marshalled for attack on the western continent. B
would take time to do all this.
Part of Eiric's mind welcomed the time it would take.
Part of him was reluctant to continue his heavy destiny.
for it would mean the end of the Age of the Young Kingdoms,
the death of the memory of the Age of the Bright Empire
which his ancestors had dominated for ten thousand
years.
The sea was at last in sight, rolling its troubled way
STORMBMNGER 63
towards the horizon to meet a seething sky. He heard the cry
of gulls and smelled the tang of the salt air in his nostrils.
With a wild shout be clapped his steed's flanks and raced
down towards the sea...
BOOK TWO
Black Sword's Brothers
In which Moumblade returns to help decide an issue between
Eiric and the Lords of Chaos ...
One
One day there came a gathering of kings, captains, and warlords
to the peaceful city of Karlaak in Ilmiora by the Weeping
Waste.
They did not come in great pomp or with grandiose gestures.
They came grim-faced and hurriedly to answer the
summons of Biric, who dwelt again in Karlaak with his
lately-rescued wife Zarozinia. And they gathered in a great
chamber which bad once been used by the old rulers of Karlaak
for the planning of wars. To this same purpose Eiric
now put it
Illuminated by flaring torches, a great coloured map of the
world was spread behind the dais on which Eiric stood. It
showed the three major continents of the East, West and
South. That of the West, comprising Jharkor, Dharijor, Shazar,
Tarkesb, Myyrrhn and the Isle of Pan Tang, was shaded
black, for all these lands were now the conquered Empire of
the Pan Tang-Dharijor alliance which threatened the security
of the assembled nobles.
Some of the men who stood armoured before Eiric were
exiles from the conquered lands-but there were few. Few
also were Eiric's Imnyrian kinsmen who had fought at the
Battle of Sequa and had been defeated with the massed army
that had sought to resist the combined might of me evil alliance.
At the head of the eldritch Imrryrians stood Dyvim
SIonn, Eiric's cousin. At his belt, encased in a sturdy scabbard,
was the runesword Mournblade, twin to the one Eiric
wore.
Here also was Montan, Lord of Lormyr, standing with
fellow rulers from the Southlands-Jerned of Filkhor, Hozd
of Argimiliar, and Koltbak of Pikarayd, adorned in painted
iron, velvet, silk and wool.
The Sealords from the Isle of the Purple Towns were less
gaudily dad with helms and breastplates of plain bronze,
67
68 Michael Moorcock
terkins, bracks and boots of unstained leather and great
broadswords at their hips. Their faces were all but hidden by
their long shaggy hair and thick, curling beards.
All these, kings and sealords alike, were inclined to stare at
Brie suspiciously, since years before he had led their royal
predecessors on the raid of Imrryr-though it had left many
thrones clear for those who now sat on them.
In another group stood the nobles of that part of the
Eastern continent lying to the west of the Sighing Desert and
the Weeping Waste, Beyond these two barren stretches of
land were the kingdoms of Eshniir, Changshai and Okara.
but there was no contact between Eiric's part of the world
and theirs-save for the small, red-headed man beside himhis
friend Moonglum of Elwhcr, an Eastern adventurer.
The Regent of Vilmir, uncle of the tcn-montb-old Icing.
headed this last group made up of senators from me citystates
comprising Umiora; the red-domed archer Rackhir
representing me city of Tanelorn; and various Merchant
Princes from towns coming under the indirect rule of VUmir
as protectorates.
A mighty gathering, representing the massed power of the
world.
But would even this be sufficient, Eiric wondered, to wipe
out me growing menace from me Westlanda?
His white albino's face was stern, his red eyes troubled -
he addressed the men be had caused to come here.
"As you know, my lords, me threat of Pan Taag and
Dfaarijor is not likely to remain confined to me Western continent
for much longer. Though barely two months have
passed since their victory was achieved, they are already marahalliag
a great fleet aimed at crushing the power of mow
kings dependent, largely, on their ships for livelihood and defence.'*
He glanced at me Sealords of the Purple Towns and (be
kings of the Southern continent.
"We of the East, it seems, are not regarded as so much of
a danger to their immediate plans and, if we did not unite
now, they would have a greater chance of success by conquering
first me Southern sea-power and wen the scattered
cities of the East We must form an alliance which can match
their strength."
*'How do you know mis is their plan, Eiric?"
STORMBRINGER 69
The voice was that of Hozel of Argimiliar, a proud-faced
man inclined it was said to fits of insanity, the inbred offspring
of a dozen incestuous unions.
"Spies, refugees-and supernatural sources. They have all
reported it**
"Even without these reports, we could be sure that mis is,
indeed, their plan," growled Kargan Sharpeyes. spokesman
for the Sealords* He looked directly at Hozel with something
akin to contempt. "And Jagreen Lem of Pan Tang might also
eek allies amongst the Southerners. There are some who
would rather capitulate to a foreign conqueror than lose their
oft lives and easily-earned treasure."
Hozel smiled coldly at Kargan. "There are some, too,
whose animal suspicions might cause them to make no move
against the Theocrat until it was too late.**
Eiric said hastily, aware of age-old bitternesses between me
hardy Sealords and their softer neighbours: "But worst of all
they would be best aided by internal feuds in our ranks,
brothers. Hozel-take it for granted that I speak truly and
mat my information is exact"
Montan, Lord of Lormyr. his face, beard and hair all
haded grey, said haughtily: "You of the North and Bast are
weak. We of the South are strong. Why should we lend you
our ships to defend your coasts? I do not agree with your
logic, Eiric. It will not be me first time it has led good men
astray-to their deaths!**
"I thought we bad agreed to bury old disputesrM Eiric said.
dose to anger, for the guilt of what he had done was still in
him.
"Aye.** nodded Kargan. "A man who cant forget the past
is a man who cannot plan for the future. I say Eiric's logic is
good!-
"You traders were always too reckless with your ships and
too gufllible when you heard a smooth-tongue. That's why
you now envy our riches." Young Jemed of Filkhor smiled in
his thin beard, his eyes on the floor.
Kargan fumed. "Too honest, perhaps, is the word yon
should have used. Southerner! Belatedly our forefathers
learned how the fat Southlands were cheating them. Their
forefathers raided your coasts, remember? Maybe we should
have continued their practice! Instead, we settled, tradedTO
Michael Moorcock
and your bellies swelled from the profits of our sweat! Oodst
Fd not trust the word of a Southern-"
EIric leaned forward to interrupt, but was interrupted himself
by Hozel who said impatiently: "The fact is this. The
Thcocrat is more likely to concentrate his first attacks on the
Eart. For these reasons: The Eastlands are weak. The Eastlands
are poorly defended. The Eastlanda are closer to hia
shores and therefore more accessible. Why should he risk his
recently-united strength on the stronger Southlands, or risk a
more hazardous sea-crossing?"
"Because,** EIric said levelly, "his Ships will be magic-aided
and distance will not count Because the South is richer and
will supply him with metals, food-**
"Ships and menf spat Kargan.
"Sol You think we already plan treachery*** Hozel glanced
first at EIric and then at Kargan. "Then why summon us here
in the first place?"
"I did not say that,** EIric said hastily. "Kargan spoke hia
own thoughts, not mine. Calm yourselves-we must be
united-or perish before superior armies and supernatural
might!"
"Oh. no!" Hozel turned to the other Southern monardn.
"What say you. my peers? Shall we lend them our ships and
warriora to protect their shores as well as ours?"
"Not when they are so ungratefully spurned,*' Jerned murmured.
"Let Jagreen Lern expend his energies upon them.
When he looks toward the South he will be weakened, and
we shall be ready for him!"
"You are fools!" EIric cried urgently. "Stand with us or
well all perish! The Lords of Chaos are behind the TheocraL
If he succeeds in his ambitions it will mean more than conquest
by a human schemer-it will mean that we shaB all be
subjected to the horror of total anarchy, on the Earth and
above it The human race is threatened!'*
Hozel stared hard at EIric and smiled. Then let the human
race protect itself and not fight under an uohuman
leader. Tis well-known that the men of Melnibone are not
true men at all.**
*'Bc that as it may,*" EIric lowered his head and lifted a
thin, white hand to point at Hozel. The king shivered and
held his ground with obvious effort. "But I know more than
that, Hozel of Argimfliar. I know that the men of me Young
STORMBRINGER 71
Kingdoms are only the gods* first mouldings-shadow-things
who precede the race of real men, even as we preceded you.
And I know morel I know that if we do not vanquish both
Jagreea Lern and his supernatural allies, then men will be
swept from me boiling fqce of a maddened planet, their destiny
unfulfilled!"
Hozel swallowed and spoke, his voice trembling.
"I've seen your muttering kind in the market places, EIric.
Men who prophecy all kinds of dooms that never take
place-mad-eyed men such as you. But we do not let them
live in Argimiliar. We fay them slowly, finger by finger, inch
by inch until they admit their omens are fallacious! Perhaps
well have that opportunity, yet!"
He swung about and half-ran from the hall. For a moment
the other Southern Monarchs stood staring irresolutely
after him.
EIric said urgently: "Heed him not, my lords. I swear on
my life that my words are true!"
Jemed said softly, half to himself: *That could mean little,
There are rumours you're immortal."
Moonglum came close to his friend and whispered: "They
are unconvinced, EIric. Tis plain they're not our men."
EIric nodded. To the Southern nobles he said: "Know mis:
Though you foolishly reject my offer of an alliance, the day
wiH come when you will regret your decision. I have been io-
atted in my own palace, my friends have been insulted and I
curse you for the upstart fools you are. But when the time
comes for you to learn the error of this decision I swear that
we shall aid you, if it is in our power. Now go!"
Disconcerted, the Southerners straggled from we hall in
Hence.
EIric turned to Kargaa Sharpcyes. "What have you decided,
Sealord?"
"We stand with you.** Kargan said simply. "My brother
Smiorgan Baldhead always spoke well of you and I remember
his words rather than the rumours which followed hia
death under your leadership. Moreover," he smiled broadly,
it is in our nature to believe that whatever a Southern weakling
decides must therefore be wrong. You have the Purple
Towns as allies-and our ships, though fewer than the combined
fleets of the south, are smooth-sailing fighting ships and
well-equipped for war."
72
I must warn you that we stand little chance without
Southern aid," EIric said gravely.
'Tm doubtful if they'd have been more than an encumbrance
with their guile and squabblings,** Kargan replied.
"Besides-have you no sorcery to help us in this?"
"I plan to seek some tomorrow," EIric told him. "Moonglum
and myself will be leaving my cousin Dyvim Slorm in
charge here while we go to Sorcerers' Isle, beyond Melaibone.
There, among the hermit practitioners of the White Arts, I
-. might find means of contacting the Lords of Law. I, as you
know, am half-sworn to Chaos, though I fight it, and am
finding increasingly that my own Demon-God is somewhat
loathe to aid me these days. At present, the White Lords are
weak, beaten back, just as we are on Earth, by the increasing
power of the Dark Ones. It is hard to contact them. The hermits
can likely help me."
Kargan nodded. "Twould be a relief to us of the Purple
Towns to know that we were not too strongly leagued with
dark spirits, I must admit"
EIric frowned. "I agree, of course. But our position is so
weak that we must accept any help-be it black or white. I
presume that there is dispute among the Masters of Chaos as
to how far they should go-that is why some of my own help
still comes from Chaoa. This blade that hangs at my side, and
the twin which Dyvim Slorm bears, are both evil. Yet they
were forged by creatures of Chaos to bring an end, on Earth
at least, to the Masters' rule here. Just as my blood-loyalties
are divided, so are the swords' loyalties. We haw no aupcpnatural
allies we can wholly rely upon."
"I feel for you," Kargan said gruffly, and ft was obvious
that he did. No man could envy Eiric's position or Eiric'i
destiny.
Orgon. Kargan's cousin-in-law, said bluntly: "Well to bed
now. Has your kinsman your full confidence?**
EIric glanced at Dyvim Slorm and smiled. "My full confidence-he
knows as much as I about this business. He shall
speak for me since be knows my basic plans.**
"Very well. WeTl confer with him tomorrow and, if we do
not see you before you leave, do well for us on Sorcerers*
Isle."
The Sealords left.
Now, for the first time, the Regent of Vilmir spoke. His
STORMBRINGER 73
voice was clear and cool. "We, too, have confidence in you
and your kinsman, EIric. Already we know you both for
clever warriors and cunning planners. Vflinir has good cause
to know it from your exploits in Bakshaan and elsewhere
throughout our territories. We, I feel, have the good sense to
bury old scores.** He turned to the Merchant Princes for confirmation
and they nodded their agreement
"Good,** EIric said. He addressed the gaunt-faced archer,
Rackhir, his friend, whose legend almost equalled his own.
"You come as a spokesman of Tanelorn, Rackhir. This will
not be the first time we have fought the Lords of Chaos.**
*Tnie.** Rackhir nodded. "Most recently we averted a
threat with certain aid from the Grey Lords-but Chaos had
caused the gateways to the Grey Lords to be closed to mortals.
We can offer you only our warriors' loyalty."
"We shall be grateful for that" EIric paced the dais. There
was no need to ask the senators of Karlaak and the other cities
of nmiora, for they had agreed to support him, come
what may, long before toe other rulers were called.
The same was true of the bleak-faced band who made up
the refugees from the West, headed by Viri-Sek. the winged
youth from Myyrrhn, last of his line since all the other members
of Ac ruling family had been slain by Jagreen Lem's
minions.
Just beyond the waus of Karlaak was a sea of tents and
pavilions over which the banners of many nations waved
sluggishly in the hot, moist wind. At this moment, EIric
knew, the proud lords of the South were uprooting their standards
and packing their tents, not looking at me war-battered
warriors of Shazar, Jharkor and Tarkesh who stared at them
in puzzlement Sight of those dun-eyed veterans should have
decided the Southern nobles to ally themselves with the East,
but evidently ft bad not
. EIric sighed and turned his back on me others to contem-
plate the great map of the worid with its shaded dark areas.
"Now only a quarter is black," he said softly to Moonglum.
"But the dark tide spreads farther and faster and soon
we may an be engulfed."
"Well dam the flow-or try to-when ft comes,** Moonfhim
said with attempted jauntiness. "But meanwhile your
wife would spend some time with you before we leave. Let's
both to bed and trust our dreams are Ughtl**
Two
Two nights later they stood on the quayside in the city of
Jadmar while a cold wind sliced its way inland.
"There she is," Eiric said, pointing down at the small boat
rocking and bumping in the water below.
"A small craft,'" Moonglum said dubiously. "She scarcely
looks sea-worthy.*'
"SheTl stay afloat longer than a larger vessel in a heavy
storm.** Eiric clambered down the iron steps. "Also,** he
added, as Moonglum put a cautious foot on the rung above
him, "shell be less noticeable and won't draw the attention of
any enemy vessels which might be scouting in these waters.**
He jumped and the boat rocked crarily. He leaned over,
grasped a rung and steadied the boat so that Moonglum
could dimb aboard.
The cocky little Eastlaoder pushed a hand through his
shock of red hair and stared up at the troubled sky.
"Bad weather for this time of year," he noted. 'Ifs hard to
understand. All the way from Karlaak we*ve had every sort
of weather, freak snow-storms, thunder-storms, hail and
winds as hot as a furnace blast Those rumours were disturbing,
too-a rain of blood in Bakshaan, balls of fiery metal
falling in the West of Vilmir, unprecedented earthquakes in
Jadmar a few hours before we arrived. It seems nature has
gone insane.**
**Not far from the truth," Eiric said grimly, untying the
mooring line. "Lift the sail will you, and tack into the wind?"
"What do you mean?** Moonglum began to loosen the saiL
It billowed into his face and his voice was muffled. "Jagreen
Lern's hordes haven't reached this part of the worid yet."
"Tbey haven*! needed to. I told you the forces of nature
were being disrupted by Chaos. We have only experienced
the backwash of what is going on in the West. If you think
these weather conditions are peculiar, you would be horrified
74
STORMBRINGER 75
by me effect which Chaos has on those parts of the worid
where its rule is almost totall"
"I wonder if you havent taken on too much in this fight.**
Moonglum adjusted the sail and it filled to send the little boat
scudding between the two long harbour walls towards the
open sea.
As they passed the beacons, guttering in Ac cold wind, Eiric
gripped the tiller tighter, taking a south-easterly course
past the Vilmirian peninsula. Overhead the stars were sometunes
obscured by the tattered shreds of Clouds streaming before
the cold, unnatural blast of the wind. Spray splashed in
his face, stinging it in a thousand places, but he ignored it.
He bad not answered Moonglum, for he also had doubts
about his ability to save the world from Chaos.
Moonglum had learned to judge his friend's moods. For
some years before they had travelled the worid together and
had learned to respect one another. Lately, since Eiric had
near-permanent residence in his wife's city of Karlaak,
Moonglum had continued to travel and had been in command
of a small mercenary army patrolling the Southern
marches of PDcarayd, driving back the barbarians inhabiting
the hinterland of that country. He had immediately relinquished
this command when Eiric's news reached him and
now, as the tiny ship bore them towards a hazy and perilfraught
destiny, savoured the familiar mixture of excitement
and perturbation which he had felt a dozen times before
when their escapades had led them into conflict with the unknown
supernatural forces so closely linked with Elric*s destiny.
He had come to accept as a fact that bis destiny was
bound to Eiric's and felt, in the deepest places of his being,
that when the time came they would both die together in
some mighty adventure.
Was this death imminent! he wondered, as he concentrated
on the sail and shivered in the blasting wind. Not yet, perhaps,
but he felt, fatalistically, that it was not far away, for
the time was looming when the only deeds of men would be
dark, desperate and great and even these might not serve to
form a bastion against the inrush of the creatures of Chaos.
Eiric,-himself, contemplated nothing, kept his mind clear
and relaxed as much as he could. His quest for the aid of the
White Lords was one which could well prove fruitless, but be
76
Michael Moorcock
chose not to dwell oo this until he knew for certain whether
their help could be invoked or not
Dawn came swimming over the horizon, showing a heaving
waste of grey water with no land in sight The wind had
dropped and the air was warmer. Banks of purple cloud bear'
ing veins of saffron and scarlet poured into the sky line the
smoke of some monstrous pyre. Soon they were sweating
beneath a moody sun and the wind had dropped so that me
sail hardly moved and yet, at the same time, the sea began to
heave as if lashed by a storm.
The sea was moving like a living entity thrashing in nightmare-filled
sleep. Moonglum glanced at Brie from where he
lay sprawled in the prow of me boat Eiric returned me gaze.
shaking his head and releasing his half-conscious grip of the
tiller. It was useless to attempt steering the boat in conditions
like these. The boat was being swept about by me wild waves,
yet no water seemed to enter it, no spray wet them. Everything
had become unreal, dream-like and for a white Eiric
felt that even if he had wished to speak he would not have
been able to do so.
Then, in me distance at first, they heard a tow droning
which grew to a whining shriek and suddenly the boat was
sent half-flying over the rolling waves and driven down into a
trench. Above them the blue and silver water seemed for a
moment to be a waB of metal-and men it came crashing
down towards them.
His mood broken, Eiric clung to the tiller and yelled)
"Hang on to the boat, Moooglum' Hang on or you're lost!**
Tepid water groaned down and they were flattened beneath
it as if swatted by a gigantic palm. The boat dropped deeper
and deeper until it seemed they would be crushed on the bottom
by me surging Mow. Then they were flung upwards
again and down and, as he glimpsed the boiling surface, Eiric
saw three mountains pushing themselves upwards, gouting
flame and lava. The boat wallowed, half-full of water tend
they set to frantically baling it out as the boat was swiried
back and forth, being driven nearer and nearer to the newformed
volcanoes.
Eiric dropped his baling pan and flung his weight against
me tiller, forcing the boat away from the mountains of fire. It
responded sluggishly, but began to drift in me opposite direction.
STORMBRINGER 77
Eiric saw Moonghnn, pate-faced, attempting to shake out
me sodden sail. He glanced upwards to try and get some kind
of bearing, but me sun seemed to have swollen and broken so
that he saw a million fragments of flame.
"This is the work of Chaos, Moonglum," he shouted, "and
only a taste, I fancy, of what it can becomel"
*They must know of our plan and seek to stop usi" Moonglum
swept sweat from his eyes with the back of his hand.
"Perhaps-but I mink not" Now he looked up again and
me sun seemed almost normal. He took a bearing and found
they were many miles off their original course.
He had planned to sail to the South of Melnibone, Isle of
the Dragon, and avoid the Dragon Sea lying to me North, for
it was well-known that me last great sea-monsters still
roamed this stretch. But now it was obvious that they were,
in fact, north of Mehubone and being driven further north affl
the time-towards Pan Tangt^
There was no chance of heading for Mebubon6 itself-he
wondered if the Isle of me Dragon had even survived me
monstrous upheavals. He would have to make straight for
Sorcerers* Isle if he could.
The ocean was calmer now, but me water had almost
reached boiling point so that every drop mat fen on his skin
eemed to scald him. Bubbles formed on the surface and it
was as if they sailed in a gigantic witch's cauldron. Dead fish
and half-reptilian forms drifted about, as thick as sea-weed,
threatening to clog me boat's passage. But me wind, though
strong, had begun to blow in one direction and Moongtuin
grinned in relief as it filled the saiL
Slowly, through me death-thick waters, they managed to
steer a north-westerly course towards Sorcerers' Isle as douda
of steam formed on me ocean and obscured their view.
Hours later they had left me heated waters behind and
were sailing beneath clear skies OB a calm sea. They allowed
themselves to doze. In less man a day they would reach Sorcerers'
Isle, but now they were overcome by me reaction to
their experience and wondered, dazedly, how they bad lived
through the awful storm.
Eiric jerked his eyes open with a shock. He was certain he
had not slept long, yet the sky was dark and a cold drizzle
was falling. As the drops touched his head and face, they
78
Michael Moorcock
oozed down it like viscous jelly. Some of it entered his mouth
and be lustily spat out the bitter-tasting stuff.
"Moonglum," he called through the gloom, "wfaafs the
hour, do you know?*'
The Eaatlander's deep-heavy voice answered dazedly. "I
know not Fd swear it is not night already!"
Eiric gave the tiller a tentative push-and the boat did not
respond. He looked over the side and it seemed they were
sailing through the sky itself. A dully luminous gas seemed to
swirl about the hull, but he could see no water.
He shuddered. Had they left the confines of the Garth?
Were they sailing through some frightful, supernatural sea?
He cursed himself for sleeping, feeling helpless-more
helpless than when be had fought the storm. The heavy,
gelatinous rain beat down strongly and he pulled the hood of
his cloak over his white hair. From his belt pouch he took
Bint and tinder and the tiny light was hist sufficient to show
him Moonglum*s half-mad eyes. The little Easuander's face
was taut with fear. Eiric had never seen such fear on his
friend's face and knew that with a little less self-control his
own face would assume a similar expression.
"Our time has ended," Moonglum trembled, "I fear that
we're dead, at last, Eiric."
"Don't prattle such emptiness, Moonglum. I have heard of
no after-life such as this." But secretly, Eiric wondered if
Moonglum's words were true.
The ship seemed to be moving rapidly through the gaseous
sea, being driven or drawn to some unknown destination. Yet
Eiric could swear that the Masters of Chaos had no
knowledge of his boat.
Faster and faster the little craft moved and then, with relief,
they heard the familiar splash of water about its keel and
it was surging through the salt-sea again. For a short while
longer the viscous rain continued to fall and then even that
was past
Moonglum sighed as the blackness slowly gave way to light
and they saw again a normal ocean about them.
"What was h, then?" he ventured, finally.
"Another manifestation of ruptured nature,*' Eirfc said
with attempted calmness. "Some warp in the barrier between
the realm of men and the realm of Chaos, perhaps? Don't
question our luck in surviving it. We are again off-comso
STORMBRINGER 79
and,*' he pointed to the horizon, "a natural storm seems to be
brewing yonder."
"A natural storm I can accept, no matter how dangerous,*'
the Eastlander murmured and made swift preparations, furiing
the sail as the wind increased and the sea churned.
In a way, Eiric welcomed the storm when it finally struck
them. At least it obeyed natural laws and could be fought by
natural means and experience of similar storms in the past
The rain refreshed their faces, the wind swept through
their hair and they fought the storm with fierce enjoyment,
me plucky boat riding the waves.
But, in spite of this, they were being driven further and
further north-east-towards the conquered coasts of Shazar.
almost in the opposite direction to their goal.
The healthy storm raged on until at thoughts of destiny
and supernatural danger were driven from their minds and
their muscles ached and nicy gasped with the shock of cold
waves on their drenched bodies.
The boat reeled and rocked, their hands were sore from
me tightness of their grip on wood and rope, but it was as if
Fate had singled them out to live, or perhaps for a death mat
would be less dean, for they continued to ride tile heaving
waters.
Then, with a shock, Eiric saw rocks rearing and Moonglum
shouted in recognition:
'The Serpent's TeethF
The Serpent's Teeth lay close to Shazar and were one o(
the most feared hazards of the shore-hugging traders of the
West. Eiric and Moonglum had seen mem before, from a distance,
but now me storm was driving them nearer and nearer,
and though they struggled to keep the boat away, they
seemed bound to be smashed to their deaths on the jagged
rocks.
A wave surged under the boat, lifted them and bore them
down. Eiric dung to the side of the boat and thought he
heard Moonglum's wild shout above the noise of the storm
before they were flung towards the Serpent's Teeth.
"FareweOr'
And then were was we terrifying sound of smashing timbers,
die feel of sharp rock lacerating his rolling body and he
was beneath the waves fighting his way to the surface to gasp
80 Michael Moorcock
in a hingful of air before another wave tossed him and
grazed his arm against the rocks.
Desperately, encumbered by the life-giving ranesword at
his belt. he attempted to swim for the looming cliffs of Shazar.
conscious that even if he lived he had arrived on enemy
soil and his chances of reaching the White Inrds were now
almost non-existent.
Three
Eiric lay exhausted on the cold Shingle listening to the musical
sound that the tide made as it drew back. over the stones.
Another sound joined that of the surf, and he recognised it
as the crunch of boots. Someone was coming towards him. In
Shazar it was most likely to be an enemy. He rolled over and
began scrambling to his feet, drawing the last reserves from
his wom-out body. His right hand had. half-drawn Stormbringer
from its scabbard before he realised dial it was Moonglum,
bent with weakness, standing grinning before him.
"Thank me gods, you livel'* Moonglum lowered himself to
the shingle and leaned back with his arms supporting him, regarding
the now calm sea and the towering Serpent's Teeth in
the distance.
"Aye, we live," EIric said, squatting down moodily. *'but
for bow long m this ruined land I cannot guess. Somewhere,
perhaps, we can find a ship-but it will mean seeking a town
or city and we're a marked pair, easily recognised by our
physical appearance."
Moonglum shook his head and laughed lightly. "You're
till the gloomy one, friend. Be thankful for your life, say I."
"Small mercies are all but useless in this conflict," Eiric
said. "Rest, now, Moonglum while I watch, then you can take
my place. There was no time to lose when we began this venture
and now we've lost days."
Moonglum gave no argument, but allowed himself immediately
to sleep and when he awoke, much refreshed though
aching horribly, Eiric slept until the moon was high and shining
brightly in a dear sky.
They trudged through the night, the sparse grass of the
coast region giving way to wet, blackened ground. It was as if
a holocaust had raged over the countryside, followed by a
rainstorm which had left behind it a marsh of ashes. Remembering
the grassy plains of mis part of Shazar, Eiric was hor-
81
82
Michael Moorcock
rifled, unable to ten whether men or the creatures of ChaO*
had caused such wanton ruin.
Noon was approaching with a hint of weird disturbances in
uie bright-clowded Sky, when they saw a long line of people
approaching them. They flattened themselves behind a small
rise and peered cautiously over it as the party drew nearer.
These were no enemy soldiers, but gaunt women and
starvling children* men who staggered in rags and a few battered
riders, obviously the remnants of some defeated band of
partisans who had held out against Pan Tang.
"I think we*U find friends, of sorts, here,*' Eiric muttered
thankfully, "and perhaps some information which will help
us."
They arose and walked towards the wretched herd. The
riders quickly grouped around the civilians and drew their
weapons, but before any challenges could be given, someone
cried from the enclosed ranks:
"Eiric of Melnibon^l Eiric-have you returned with news
of rescue?**
Eiric didn't recognise (he voice, but he knew his face was
legend with its dead white akin and glowing red eyes.
Toa seeking rescue myself, friends,** he said with poorlyassumed
cheerfulness. "We were shipwrecked on your coasts
whue on a journey which we hoped would help us lift the
yoke of Jagreen Lem from off the Westlands, but unless we
find another ship our chances are scant"
"Which way did you sail, Eiric?" said me unseen spokesman.
"We sailed to Sorcerers* Isle in the south-west, mere to invoke
the aid, if we could, of the White Lords,** Moonglum
replied.
"Then you were going in the wrong direction"*
Eiric straightened his back and tried to peer into the
throng.
"Who are you to teD us that?**
There was a disturbance in the crowd and a bent, middfoaged
man leaning on a staff with long curling moustachios
adorning his fair-skinned face broke from the ranks and
stood mere. The ridera drew back their horses so that Eiric
could see him properly.
"I am named Ohada the Seer, once famous to Dioperda as
a predictor of events. But Dioperda was razed in the sack of
STORMBRINGER 83
Sbazar and I was lucky enough to escape with these few
people who are all from Dioperda, one of the last cities to
fall before Pan Tang*s sorcerous might I have a message of
great import for you, Eiric. It is for your ears only and I received
it from one you know-one who may help you and,
indirectly, us.**
**You have piqued my curiosity and raised my hopes,** Eiric
beckoned with his band. "Come, seer, tell me your news
and let's all trust it is as good as you hint"
Moonglum took a step back as the seer approached. Both
he and the Dioperdans watched with curiosity as Ohada whispered
to Eiric.
Eiric himself had to strain to catch the words.
"I bear a message from a being called Sepiriz, He says mat
what you have failed to do, he has done, but there is something
which you must do that he cannot He says to go to the
carved city and there he will enlighten you further."
"Sepiriz! How did he contact you?"
"I am clairvoyant. He came to me in a dream."
**Your words could be treacherous, designed to lead me
into Jagreen Lem's hands.**
"Sepiriz added one thing to me-he told me that we should
meet on this very spot Could Jagreen Lem know that?"
"Unlikely-but, by the same reckoning, could anyone
know that?**
^ Then Eiric remembered that Sepiriz and his brothers, who
% bad helped him earlier, were the servitors of Fate. And Fate
';,' had already played an important part in this. He nodded.
r Thanks, seer."
Then he shouted to the riders.
"We need a pair of horses-the best you havel**
"Our horses are valuable to us." grumbled a knight in torn
nnour, **they are all we have."
"My companion and I need to move swiftly if we are to
save your land. Come, risk a pair of horses against the possibility
of vengeance on your conquerors.**
The knight dismounted and so did the man beside him.
They led their steeds up to Eiric and Moonglum.
"Use them wel. Eiric."
Eiric took the reins and swung himself into the saddle. "I
will," said he. "What are your plans now?"
"Well fight on as best we can."
84
"Would ft not be wiser to hide in Ac mountains or the
Marshes of the Mist?"
"If you had witnessed the depravity and terror of Jagreen
Lera's filthy rule, you would not make men an enquiry.** the
knight said hollowly. Though we cannot hope to win against
a man whose servants can command the very earth to heave
like the ocean, pull down floods of salt water from the sky
and send green clouds scudding down to destroy helpless children
in nameless ways, we shall take what vengeance we cani
This part of the continent is calm compared to what is going
on elsewhere. Dreadful geological changes are taking place
everywhere. You would not recognise a hill or forest ten
miles north. And those that you passed one day might well
have changed or disappeared on the next"
"We have witnessed something of the like on our sea journey,"
Eiric nodded. "I wish you a long life of revenge, friend.
I myself have scores to settle with Jagreen Lern and his accomplice."
"His accomplice? You mean King Sarosto of DharijorT" A
thin smile crossed the knight's haggard face. "You'll take no
vengeance on Sarosto-he was assassinated soon after our
forces were vanquished at the battle of Sequa. Though nothing
was proved, it is common knowledge that be was killed at
me orders of me Theocrat who now rule* the entire continent."*
The knight signed. "And who can stand for long
against such captains as Jagreen Lem commands?
"Who are these captains?"
"Why, he has summoned an me Dukes of Hen to ban.
Whether they will accept his mastery much longer, I do not
know. It is our belief that Jagreen Lem win be the next to
die-and Hell, unchecked, will rule in his placel"
"I hope not," Eiric said softly, "for I wont be cheated of
my vengeance,"
The knight shrugged. "With the Dukes of Hell as his allies,
Jagreen Urn will soon rule me world."
"Let us hope I can find a means of disposing of mat dark
aristocracy, and keeping my vow to slay Jagreen Lern," Eiric
said and, with a wave of thanks to the seer and the two
knights, turned his horse towards the mountains of Jharkor,
Moonglum in his wake.
They got little rest on their perilous ride to me mountain
STORMBRINGER 85
home of Sepfriz for, as the knight had told mem, the ground
itself seemed alive and anarchy ruled everywhere.
Afterwards, Eiric remembered little save a feeling of utter
horror and me noise of unholy screechings in his ear, dark
colours, gold, reds, blue. black and me flaring orange that
was everywhere, me sign of Chaos on Earth.
But on me way he managed to inform Moonglum of his
previous encounter with Sepiriz and told him something of
what me Lord of Nihrain had mentioned of his destiny, how
the last of me royal line of old Melnibooe, Eiric and Dyvim
Slorm bore blades of Chaos-make which were destined to
destroy me rule of Chaos on me planet and prepare me
world for its death and rebirth as an era where Law would
dominate.
Moonglum had not replied, had, instead, resolved to stand
vim Eiric when the final day came whether they won or lost
the war against Chaos.
In the mountain regions dose to Nihrain they saw evidence
mat me rule of Chaos was not so complete as in other parts
nearby. This proved mat Sepiriz and his nine black brothers,
last of me Nihrain, were exerting at least some control
against me forces threatening to engulf them.
Through steep gorges of towering black rock, along treacherous
mountain paths, down slopes that rattled with loose
tones and seemed likely to start an avalanche, they pressed
deeper and deeper into the heart of me ancient mountains.
These were me oldest mountains in me world, and they held
one of me Earth's most ancient secrete-the domain of me
immortal Nihrain who had ruled for centuries even before
me coming of me Melnibooeaxn whose Bright Empire had
lasted ten thousand years.
And men, at last, they came to the Hewn City of Nihrain,
Its towering palaces, temples and fortresses cut into the living
black granite, hidden in the depths of a gorge that might
have been bottomless. Virtually cut off from all but me faintest
filterings of sunlight, it had brooded here since earliest
times.
Down me narrow paths they guided their reluctant steeds
unt3 they had reached a huge gateway which was carved
with the figures of titans and half-men looming above them,
80 mat Moonglum gasped and immediately fell silent,
86
Michael Moorcock
overawed by the genius which could accomplish the twin
feats of gigantic engineering and powerful art
In the caverns of Nihrain, also carved to represent scenes
from the legends of the Nihrain, Sepiriz awaited them, a welcoming
smile on his thin-lipped ebony face.
''Greetings, Sepiriz," Eiric dismounted and allowed slaves
to lead his horse away. Moonglum did likewise, a trifle war*
fly.
"I was informed correctly." Sepiriz clasped Elric*s shoulders
in his hands. "I am glad for I learned you were bound to
Sorcerers' Isle to seek the White Lords* help."
*Truc. Is their help, then, unobtainable?**
**Not yet We ourselves are trying to contact them, with me
aid of the hermit magicians of me islands, but so far Chaos
has blocked our attempts. But there is work for you and your
sword nearer to home. Come to my chamber and refresh
yourselves. We have some wine which will revitalise you and
when you have drunk your fill 111 tell you what task Fate has
decided for you now."
Eiric put down his cup and breathed in deeply, feeling
relaxed and invigorated. He pointed at me wine-jar and said:
"A man might easily become addicted to such a brewl"
"I'm addicted already,*' Moonglum grinned, pouring faimnelf
another cup.
Sepiriz shook his head. "It has a strange quality, our
Nihrain wine. It tastes pleasant and refreshes the weary, yet
once his strength is regained me man who drinks it then is
nauseated. That is why we stfll have some in our cellars. But
our stocks are low-the vines from which it was made have
long since passed from the Earth."
"A magic potion," Moonglum said, replacing his cup on
the table.
"If you like to so designate it Eiric and I are of an earlier
age when magic was normal and Chaos ruled, if more quietly
than now. You men of the Young Kingdoms are perhaps
right to loathe it as you do, for we hope to ready me world
for Law soon and then, perhaps, tbcy*u find similar brews by
more painstaking methods, methods they can understand bet*
ter."
"I doubt it," Moonglum laughed.
Eiric sighed. "If we are not ludder man we have been,
87
STORMBRINGER
we*u see Chaos unleashed on me globe and Law forever vanquished,**
he said gloomily.
"And no luck for us if Law is triumphant, eh?" Sepiriz
poured himself a cup of the wine, showing that be, also, must
be weary with his own efforts.
"What do you mean?" Moonglum asked curiously.
Sepiriz told him that he and Eiric, though fighting Chaos,
were actually fitted to a world where Chaos, to a great extent,
was dominant In the worid they hoped for, where Law ruled,
there would be no place for their like.
Moonglum looked sharply at Eiric, understanding that
much more of his friend's unenviable predicament.
"You said there was work for me and my sword, Sepiriz.*'
JBuic leaned forward. "What's its nature?"
"You have no doubt already learned that Jagreen Lem has
summoned the Dukes of Hell to captain his men and keep bis
conquered lands under control?"
-Yes."
"You understand the import of this. Jagreen Lem has
succeeded in making a sizeable breach in the Law-constructed
barrier which has hitherto kept me creatures of Chaos from
wholly ruling the planet He is forever widening this breach
/ as his power increases. This explains how he could summon
'} such a mighty assembly of Hell's nobility where, in the past
i it was hard to bring one to our plain. Arioch is among
^ them .. ."
4 "Ariochi" Arioch was Euic's patron, the principle god wor-
^ shipped by his ancestors. "Then I am now a total outcast un-
.,;' protected either by Law or by ChaosF
"Your only dose supernatural ally is your sword," Sepiriz
said grimly. "And, perhaps, its brothers."
"What brothers? There is only me sister-sword Moumblade
which Dyvim Slorm has!'1
"Do you remember that I told you how the twin swords
were actually only an earthly manifestation of their supernatural
selves?" Sepiriz said calmly.
"Yes.-
"Well. I can ten you now that Stonnbrmger's 'real' being is
related to other supernatural force* on another plane. I know
how to summon them, but these relations are also creatures
of Chaos and therefore, as far as you're concerned, somewhat
hard to control. They could well get out of hand in some
88
Michael Moorcock
way-perhaps even tura against you. Stormbringer, as you
have discovered in the past, is bound to you by ties even
stronger than those which bind it to its brothers, but its brothera
outnumber it and Stormbringer might not be able to protect
you against them.**
"Why have I never known this?"
"You have known it, in a way. Do you remember times
when you have called for help and help has come?"
"Yes. You mean that this help has been supplied by
Stormbringer's brethren?"
"I do. Already they are used to coming to your help. They
are not what you and I would call 'intelligent,' though sentient,
and are therefore not so strongly bound to Chaos as its
reasoning servants. They can be controlled, to a degree, by
anyone who has power such as you have over one of their
brothers. If you need their help, you will need to remember a
rune which I shall tell you later."
"And what is my task?"
*To destroy me Dukes of Heu.**
"But that's impossible. They are one of me mightiest
groups ifl the entire domain of Chaos!**
True. But you control one of the mightiest weapons. That
Is your task. Already mere are hints that the Demon Dukes
have taken some of Jagreen Lem's power from him. The
fool. He stfll refuses to realise mat he is a puppet of Chaos
and thinks he can rule over such supernatural might as the
Dukes represent But it is a certainty mat with these friends
Jagreen Lem can defeat the Southlands with a minimum of
expenditure in arms and men. Without them he could do
h-but It would take more time and effort and therefore give
us a slight advantage to prepare against him white he subdues
the Southlands,"
Eiric did not bother to ask Sepiriz how he knew of the
Southerners* decision to fight Jagreen Lern alone. Sepiriz obviously
had many powers as was proved by his ability to cootact
Brie through the seer.
"I have sworn to help the Southlands in spite of their refusal
to side with us against me Theocraf" he said calmly.
"And you'll keep your oath-by destroying the Dukes if
you can.**
"Destroying Arioch, and Balaa and Maluk . . .** Eiric
STORMBRINGER 89
whispered the names, fearful that even here he might invoke
them.
"Arioch has always been an intractable demon,** Moonglum
pointed out "Many's the time in the past he has refused
to aid you, Eiric.'*
"Because," Sepiriz said, "be already had some knowledge
that you and he were to fight in the future.'*
Though the wine bad refreshed his body, Eiric began to
ache in different ways. The strain on his soul was almost at
breaking point To fight the demon-god his ancestors had
worshipped for millenia ... The old blood was still strong in
him, the old loyalties stm present
Sepiriz rose and gripped EJric'a Shoulder, staring with black
eyes into the dazed and smouldering red.
"You have pledged yourself to this mission, remember."
Eiric drew himself upright, nodded vaguely. "Aye. And
even had I been given this knowledge before I made the
pledge, I would still have made it But.. "
"What?"
"Do not place too much faith in my ability to fulfil this
part, Sepiriz.'*
The black Nihrain said nothing.
Later he left Eiric brooding and returned with a white tablet
on which Old nines were engraved.
He handed it to the albino who received it wordlessly.
"Memoriae the spell," Sepiriz said soflty, "and then destroy
fee tablet But remember, only use it in an extreme
emergency for, as I warned you, Stormbringer's brethren may
refuse to aid you.**
Eiric made an effort and controlled his emotion. For a long
time, long after Moonglum had gone to rest, he studied the
rune, learning not only how to verbalise it but also me twists
of logic which he would have to understand, and the state of
mind into which he must put himself if h were to be effeo*
five.
When both he and Sepiriz were satisfied, Eiric allowed a
lave to take him to his sleeping chamber, but slumber came
hard to him and he spent the night in restless torment until a
slave came to wake him the next morning and found him
fully dressed and ready to ride for Pan Tang where the
Dukes of Hell were assembled.
Four
Through the stricken lands of the west rode BIric and Moonghim,
astride sturdy Nihrain steeds that seemed to need no
rest and contained no fear. The Nihrain horses were a special
gift, for they had certain additional powers to their unnatural
strength and endurance. Sepiriz had told them how, in fact,
the steeds did not have full existence on the earthly plane and
that their hooves did not touch the ground in the strict sense,
but touched the stuff of their other plane. This gave them the
ability to appear to gallop on air-or water.
Scenes of terror were everywhere to be found. At one time
they saw in the distance a frightful sight, a wild and hellish
mob destroying a village built around a castle. The castle itself
was in flames and on the horizon a mountain gouted
smoke and fire. Though the looters had human shape, they
were degenerate creatures, spilling blood and drinking it with
equal abandon. And directing them without joining their orgy
Eiric and Moonglum saw what seemed to be a corpse astride
me living skeleton of a horse, bedecked in bright trappmgs, a
naming sword in its band and a golden helm on its head.
They skirted the scene and rode fast away from it, through
mists that looked and smelt like blood, over rivers dammed
with death, past rustling forests that seemed to follow them,
beneath skies often filled with ghastly winged shapes bearing
even ghastlier burdens.
At other times they met groups of warriors, many of them
m the armour and trappings of the conquered nations, but
depraved and obviously sold to Cfaao*.
These they fought or avoided, depending on me circumstance
and, when at last they reached die cliffs of Jharkor
and saw the sea which would take them to the Isle of Pan
Tang, they knew they had ridden through a land which had
become, literally, a hell on earth.
90
STORMBRINGER 91
Scarcely stopping, Eiric and Moonglum rode their horses
over the water towards the evil-heavy island of Pan Tang
where Jagreen Lem and his terrible allies prepared to sail
with their giant fleet and smash the seapower of me south before
conquering the Southlands themselves.
"Eirici" Moonglum called above the whining wind, **ahould
we not proceed with more caution?**
"Caution? What need of that when me Dukes of Heu must
surely know their turncoat servant comes to fight theml**
Moonglum pursed his long lips, disturbed, for Eiric was m
a wild, maddened mood. He got little comfort, also, from the
knowledge that Sepiriz had charmed his short-aword and his
sabre both. with one of the few white spells be had at his
command.
Now the bleak cliffs of Pan Tang were in sight, apraylashed
and ominous, the sea moaning about them as if in
some special torment which Chaos could inflict on nature itself.
And also around the island a peculiar darkness hovered,
shifting and changing.
They entered the darkness as the Nihrain steeds pounded
up the steep, rocky beach of Pan Tang, a place that had always
been ruled by its black priesthood, a grim theocracy
that had sought to emulate the legendary sorcerer-kings of
the Bright Empire of Mclnibone. But Eiric, last of those
kings, and landless now with few subjects, knew that me dark
arts had been natural and lawful to his ancestors, whereas
these human-beings had perverted themselves to worship an
unholy hierarchy they barely understood.
Sepiriz had given them their route and they galloped across
the turbulent land towards the capital-Hwamgaarl, City of
Screaming Statues.
Pan Tang was an island of green, shiny, obsidian rock that
gave off bizarre reflections; rock that seemed alive.
Soon they could see the looming walls of Hwamgaarl m
the distance. As they drew nearer, an army of black-cowied
swordsmen, chanting a particularly horrible litany, seemed to
rise from the ground ahead.
Eiric had no time to spare for these, recogniseable as a detachment
of Jagreen Lero's warrior-priests.
"Up, steedl" be cried and the Nihrain horse leapt skywards,
passing over the disconcerted priests with a fantastic
Michael Moorcock
bound. Moonglum did likewise, his laughter mocking them
u he and his friend thundered on towards Hwamgaaril
Their way was dear for *ome distance, since Jagrcca Lern
had evidently expected the detachment to hold the pair at
least for some time.
But when the City of Screaming Statues was barcty a mile
away, die ground began to grumble and gaping cracks split
its surface. This did not overiy disturb them, for the Nihrain
horses had no use for earthly tenam in any case.
The sky above seemed to heave and shake itaelf, the
darknftss became flushed with streaks of ^""i"*1"* ebony, and
from the fissures m the ground, monstrous shapes fpraag up!
Vulture-headed lions, fifteen feet high, prowled in hungry
anticipation towards them, their feathered maaes rustling as
they approached.
To Moonglum's frightened astonishment, Eiric laughed and
the Eastlander knew his friend had gone mad.
But Eiric was ft*nnu>r with this ghoulish pack since his
own ancestors had formed it for their own purposes a dozen
centuries before.
Evidently, Jagreea Lcrn had discovered the pack nuking
on the bordera between Chaos and Earth and had utilised it
without being aware of how it had been created.
Old words formed on Eiric's pale lips and he spoke affectionately
to the towering bird-beasts.
They ceased their progress toward him and glanced uncertainly
around them, their loyalties evidently divided.
Feathered tails lashed, daw worked in and out of pads,
scraping great gashes ia the rock.
And, taking advantage of this, Eiric and Moonglum
walked their horses through mem and emerged just as a
droning but angry voice rapped from the heavens, ordering,
in the High Tongue of Mehubone; "Destroy themT'
One lion-vulture bounded uncertainly towards them. Another
followed it and another, till the whole pack raced to
catch them.
"Faster!" Eiric whispered to the Nihrain horse, but the
steed could hardly keep the distance separating them.
There was nothing for it but to turn. Deep in the recesses
of his memory he recalled there was a certain spell he had
teamed as a child. Au the old spells of Memibone had been
passed on to him by his father with the warning that. in these
STORMBRINGER 93
times, many of them were virtually useless. But there had
been one-the spell for calling the vulture-headed Uons and
another spell...
Now he remembered it! The spell for sending them back to
the domain of Chaos. Would it work.?
He adjusted his mind, sought the words he needed as the
beasts plunged on towards him.
Creatures! Matik of Melnibone made thee
From stuff of unformed madness!
If thou wouldst live as thou art now.
Get hence, or Afatik's brew again shall bet
The creatures paused and, desperately, Eiric repeated Ac
spell, afraid that he had made a small mistake, either within
his mind or in the words.
Moonglum, who bad drawn his horse up beside Eiric, did
not dare speak his fears, for he knew the albino sorcerer must
not be hindered while spell-making. He watched in trepidation
as the leading beast gave voice to a cawing roar.
But Eiric heard the sound with relief, for it meant the
beasts had understood his threat and were still bound to obey
the spell.
Slowly, half-reluctantly. they crawled down into the fissures
and vanished.
Sweating, Eiric said triumphantly: "Luck is with us so farl
JagrccD Lern either under-estimated my powers or else this is
all he could summon with his own! More proof, perhaps, that
Chaos uses him and not the other way about!"
"Tempt not such luck by speaking of it," Moonglum said
warniagly. "From what you'd told me, these are puny things
compared with that which we must soon face!**
Eiric shot an angry look at his friend and nodded briefly.
He did not like to think of his coming task.
Now they neared the huge walls of Hwamgaarl. At intervals
along the walls, which slanted outwards at an angle to
encumber potential besiegers, they saw the screaming statues-once
men and women whom Tagreen Lern and his forefathers
had turned to rock but allowed them to retain thenlife
and ability to speak. They spoke little, but screamed
much, their ghastly shouts rolling over the disgusting city like
the tormented voices of the damned-and damned they were.
94 Michael Moorcock
These sobbing waves of sound were horrifying even to Elric's
ears, familiar with such sounds as they were.
Then another noise blended with them as die mighty portcullis
of Hwamgaart's main gate squealed upwards and from
it poured a host of well-aimed men.
"Evidently. Jagreen Lem's powers of sorcery have been exhausted
for the meantime and the Dukes of Hell disdain to
join him in a fight against a pair of mere mortals!" Eiric said,
reaching with his right band for the hilt of his black runesword
hanging at his left hip.
Moonglum was beyond speech. Wordlessly he drew both
his own charmed blades, knowing he must fight and vanquish
his own fear before be could encounter the men who ran at
him.
With a wild howl that drowned out the screams from the
statues, Stormbringer climbed from the scabbard and stood in
Eric's hand, waiting in anticipation for the new souls it
might drink, for the life-stuff which it could pass on to Eiric
and fill him with dark and stolen vitality.
Eiric half-cringed at the feel of his blade in his damp hand.
But be shouted to the advancing soldiers: "See jackals! See
the sword! Forged by Chaw to vanquish Chaoal Come, let it
drink your souls and spill your blood! We are ready for you!"
He did not wait but, with Moongluro behind him, spurred
the Nihrain horse into the ranks, hewing about him with
something of the old delight
Now. so symbioticauy linked with the hell-blade was he.
that a hungry joy of killing swept through him, the joy of
soul-stealing which drew a surging, unholy vitality into his
deficient veins.
Though there were over a hundred warriors blocking hia
path to the still-open gate. he smashed a bloody path through
them and Moonglum, seized by something akin to his friend's
mood, was equally successful in dispatching all who came
against him.
Familiar with horror as they were, the soldiers soon became
loath to approach the screaming runesword as it shone
with a peculiarly brilliant light-a black light that pierced the
blackness itself.
Laughing in his half-insane triumph, Eiric felt the callous
joy that his ancestors must have felt long ago when they conquered
the world and made it kneel to the Bright Empire.
STORMBRINGER 95
Chaos was, indeed, fighting Chaos-but Chaos of an older,
cleaner sort come to destroy me perverted upstarts who
thought themselves as mighty as the Dragon Lords of Melnibonet
A bloody trench had formed in the enemy's ranks and
through this the pair plunged until the gateway gaped like a
monster's maw before them.
Without pausing. Eiric rode laughing through H and people
scuttled to hiding as he entered, in bizarre triumph, the City
of Screaming Statues.
"Where now?" gasped Moonglum, all fear driven from
him.
To the Theocrafs Temple-palace, of courae. There Arioch
and his fellow duke no doubt await us)"
Through the echoing streets of me city they rode, proud
and terrible, as if with an army at their backs. Dark buildings
towered above them but not a face dared peep from a window.
Pan Tang had planned to rule the worid-and it might
yet-but for the moment its denizens were fully demoralised
by me sight of two men taking their huge city by storm.
They pulled their horses to a halt as they reached the wide
plaza and saw the huge bronze sepulchre swinging on its
chains in the centre. Beyond it rose Jagreen Lem*s palace, all
columns and towers* ominously quiet
Even the statues had ceased to scream and the horses'
hooves made no sound as Eiric and Moonghun approached
the sepulchre. The blood-reddened runesword was still in Elric's
hand and with it he took a mighty sweep at the Chains
supporting the sepulchre-the holiest vessel of this unholy
place. The supernatural blade bit into toe metal and severed
the links.
The crash as the sepulchre dropped and smashed was magnified
a thousand times by me silence. The noise echoed
throughout Hwamgaarl and every inhabitant left alive knew
what it aignified.
Thus I challenge tbee, Jagreen LornF Eiric shouted,
aware that these words would also be heard by everyone. "I
have come to pay UK debt I promisedl Come, puppetl" be
paused, even his triumph not sufficient to fully quench his
nervousness at what be must say now. "Cornel Bring Hell's
Dukes with you-w
96 Michael Moorcock
Moonglum swallowed, his eyes rolling as he studied Eiric'a
twisted face. The albino continued:
"Bring Arioch, and Balao, and Maluk! Bring the proud
princes of Chaos with you for I have come to send them
back to their own realm forever!"
The silence again enfolded his high-chaDenge and he heard
its echoes die away in the far places of die city.
Then, from somewhere inside die palace, he heard a movement
His heart pounded against his rib-cage^ threatening to
break through the bones and hang throbbing on his chest as
proof of his mortality.
He heard a sound like die clopping of monstrous hooves
and ahead of it the measured' steps that must be those of a
man.
His eyes fixed themselves on die great golden doors of d
palace, half-hidden in UK shadows that die columns threw.
The doors began to open sflently.
Then a figure, dwarfed by die size of die doors, stepped
forth and stood mere regarding Eiric with a horrible anger
smouldering hi its eyes.
On its body scarlet armour glowed as if red-hot On its left
arm was a shield of die same stuff and in its hand a steel
fword.
Jagreen Lern, said in a voice that trembled with rage:
"So, King Eiric, you have kept part of your word, after
an."
"And I plan to keep die rest of it," Eiric said widi sudden
calm. "Step forward, dieocrat 1*11 meet you fairly in single
combat**
Jagreen Lem gave a sneering, hollow laugh.
Tairiy? Widi that blade in your hand? Once I met it and
did not perish, but now it bums with die blood and souls of a
score of my best warrior-priests. I would not be so foolish.
No-let diose you have challenged meet you."
He stepped to one side.
The doors gaped wider and if Eiric expected giant figures
to emerge, he was disappointed. The dukes had assumed die
forms of men.
But there was a power about diem mat filled die air as
diey moved to stand, disdainful of Jagreen Lern, upon die
topmost step of die palace.
Eiric glimpsed their beautiful, smiling faces and shuddered
STORMBRINGER 97
again, for diere was a kind of love on dieir faces, a kind of
pride-a kind of confidence so that, for a moment, he was
filled widi die wish to jump from his horse and fling himself
1 dieir feet to plead forgiveness for what he had become.
"Well. Eiric," said Arioch. the leader, sofdy. "Would you
repeat and return to us?" The voice was silvery in its beauty
and Eiric half-made to dismount.
But then be clapped bis hands to his ears, die runesword
hanging by its wrist-throng, and cried:
"No! No! I must do what I must! Your time, like mine, is
overt"
"Do not speak dius, Eiric," Balan said persuasively, bis
words passing Eiric's hands and whispering in his skutl.
**Chaos has never been dus powerful on Earth-not even in
earliest days. We shall make you great-we shall make you a
Lord of Chaos, equal to ourselves! We give you immortality,
Eiric. If you behave so foolishly as you behave now, you will
bring yourself only death and none shall remember you."
"I know diat! I would not wish to be remembered in a
world ruled by Law!"
Maluk laughed sofdy.
That will never come to pass. We block every move diat
Law makes to try to bring help to Earth."
**And this is why you must be destroyed!*' Eiric cried.
"We are immortal-we can never be slain!" Arioch said,
and diere was a tinge of impatience in his voice.
"Then I shall send you back to Chaos in such a way that
you shall never have power on the Earth again!"
Eiric swung his runeblade into his hand and it trembled
diere. moaning quietly as if unsure of itself, )ust as he was.
**See!" Balan walked part-way down the steps. "See-even
your trusted sword knows diat we speak truth."
"You speak a sort of tnidi." Moooglum said in a quavering
tone, astonished at his own bravery. "But I remember
something of a greater truth-a law that should bind both
Chaos and Law-the Law of die Balance. The Supreme
Spirit holds diat balance over the earth and it should be that
Chaos and Law war to keep diat balance straight Sometimes
the balance tips one way, sometimes another-and dius are
die ages of die Earth created. But an incqual balance of this
magnitude is wrong. In your struggling you of Chaos may
have forgotten this!"
**We have forgotten h for good reason, mortal. The bal-
98 Michael Moorcock
ance has tipped to nidi an extent in our favour that it is no
longer adjustable. We triumph I"
Eiric used this pause to collect himself. Sensing his
renewed strength, Stormbringer responded with a confident
purr.
The dukes also sensed it and glanced at one another.
Ariocb'a beautiful face seemed to fiare with anger and his
pseudo-body glided down the steps towards EJric, his fellow
dukes following.
Eiric's steed backed away a few paces.
A blot of living fire seemed to appear in Arioch*s hand and
it shot towards me albino. He felt cold pain in his chest and
he staggered in me saddle.
"Your body is unimportant, Eiric. But think of a similar
blow to your soul!" Arioch screamed, the facade of patience
dropping from him.
Eiric flung back his head and laughed. Arioch had be-
trayed himself. If he had remained calm he would have bad a
greater advantage, but now he showed himself perturbed,
whatever he had said to the contrary.
"Arioch-you aided me in the past. You wffl regret that!"
There's still time to undo my folly, upstart mortal!" Another
bolt came streaking towards him but Eiric passed
Stormbringer before it and observed, in relief, that it deflected
the unholy weapon.
But, against such might, they were surely doomed, unless
they could invoke some supernatural aid. But Eiric dared not
risk summoning his nmesword's brothers. Not yet He must
think of some other means.
As be retreated towards the searing bolts, Moonglum behind
him whispering almost impotent charms, he thought of
Ac vulture-lions he had sent back to Chaos. Perhaps he could
recall them-for a different purpose.
The spell was fresh in his mind, requiring a slightly
changed mental state and scarcely changed wording.
Calmly, working mechanically to deflect the bolts of the
dukes whose features had changed hideously to retain their
previous beauty but take on an increasingly malevolent appearance,
he uttered the spell.
Creatures! Matik of MeJnibone made thee
From stuff of unformed madness!
STORMBRINGER 99
// thou wouldst live, then aid me now,
Come hither, or Matik's brew again shall be!
From out of the rolling darks of the plaza, the beaked
beasts appeared, prowling.
Eiric yelled at the dukes. "Mortal weapons cannot harm
you! But these are beasts of your own plane-sample their
ferocity.** He ordered the vulture-lions upon the dukes.
Obviously put out by this. Arioch and his fellows backed
towards the steps again, calling their own commands to the
giant animals, but the things advanced, gathering speed.
Eiric saw Arioch shout, rave and then his body seemed to
split asunder and rise in a new, less recognisable shape as the
beasts attacked. AH was suddenly ragged colour, sound and
disordered matter.
Behind the embattled demons, Eiric saw Jagreen Lem running
back into his palace. Hoping that the creatures he had
summoned would hold the dukes, Eiric rode his horse around
the boiling mass and galloped up the steps.
Through the doors the two men rode, catching a glimpse
of the terrified theocrat running before them.
"Your allies were not so strong as you believed, Jagreen
Lem!" Eiric yelled as he bore down upon his enemy. "Why,
you foolish latecomer, did you think your knowledge
matched that of a Melnibonean!"
Jagreen Lem began to climb a winding staircase, labouring
up me steps, too afraid even to look back.
Eiric laughed again and pulled his horse to a stop,
watching me running man:
"Dukes! Dukes!" sobbed Jagreen Lem as he climbed. "Do
not desert me now!"
Moonglum whispered. "Surely those creatures will not defeat
the aristocracy of hell?**
Eiric shook his head. "I do not expect them to, but if I finish
Jagreen Lem, at least it could put an end to his conquests
and demon-summoning." He spurred the Nihrain steed up the
steps after the theocrat who heard him coming and flung
himself into a room. Eiric heard a bar fall and bolts squeal.
When he reached the door it fell in at a blow of his sword
and he was in a small chamber. Jagreen Lem had disappeared.
100 Michael Moorcock
Dismounting, Etric went to a small door in me farthest
corner of the room and again demolished it A narrow stair
led upwards, obviously into a tower.
Now he could take his vengeance, he thought, as he
reached yet another door at the top of the stair and-drew
back bis sword to smite it. The blow fell, but the door held.
"Curse the thing, it is protected by charms!" he swore.
He was just about to aim another blow, when he heard
Moonglum's urgent calling from below.
"Eirici Eiric-they've defeated the creatures. They are returning
to the palace."
He would have to leave Jagreen Lern for the meantime.
He sprang down the steps, into the chamber and out on to
the stair. In the hall he saw the flowing shapes of the unholy
trinity. Half-way up the stair, Moonglum was quaking.
"Stormbringer," said Eiric, "it is time to summon your
brothers."
The sword twisted in bis hand, as if in assent
Eiric began to chant the mind-torturing, throat-torturing
rune that Sepiriz had taught him.
Stormbringer moaned a counterpoint chorus to the dirge as
the battle-worn dukes assumed different shapes and began to
rise menacingly towards Eiric.
Then, in the air all about him, he saw shapes appear,
shadowy shapes half on his own plane, half on the plane of
Chaos. He saw them stir and suddenly it seemed as if the air
was filled with a million swords, each a twin to StonnbringerI
Acting on instinct, Eiric released his grip on his blade and
flung it towards the rest. It hung in the air before them and
they seemed to acknowledge it "Lead them, Stonnbrmgert
Lead them against the dukes-or your master perishes and
you'll not drink another human soul again!"
The sea of swords rustled and a dreadful moaning
emanated from them. The dukes flung themselves upwards
towards the albino and he recoiled before Ihe evil hatred that
poured from the twisting shapes.
Glancing down he saw Moonglum slumped in his saddle
and did not know if be had perished or fainted.
Then the swords rushed upon the reaching dukes and Elric's
head swam with the sight of a million blades plunging
into the stuff of their beings.
The unholy noise of the battle filled his ears, the dreadful
STORMBRINGER 101
sight of (he toiling conflict clouded his vision. Without
Stormbringer's vitality he felt weak and limp. He felt his
knees shake and crumple and he could do nothing to aid the
black sword's brothers as they clashed with the Dukes of
Hell.
He collapsed, aware that if he witnessed such horror much
longer he would become totally insane. Thankfully, be felt his
mind go blank and then, at last, he was unconscious, unable
to know which would win.
Five
His body itched. His arms and bade ached. His wrists pounded
with agony. Eiric opened his eyes.
Immediately opposite him, spreadeagled in chains against
the wall he saw Moonglum. Dull flame nickered in the centre
of the place and he felt pain cm his naked knee, looked down
and saw Jagreen Lern.
The Theocrat spat at him.
"So," Eiric said hoHowly. "I failed. You triumph after aD.**
Jagreen Lem did not look triumphant Rage still burned in
his eyes.
"Oh, how shall I punish you," he said.
"Punish me? Then-?** Elric*s heartbeat increased.
"Your final spell succeeded," the Theocrat said dully, turning
away to contemplate the brazier. "Both your allies and
mine vanished and all my attempts to contact the dukes have
proved fruitless. You achieved your threat-or your minions
did-you sent them back to Chaos foreveri"
"My sword-what of that?"
The Tbeocrat smiled bitterly. "That's my only pleasure.
Your sword vanished with its brothers. You are weak and
helpless now, Ebic. You are mine to maim and torture until
the end of my life."
Eiric was dumbfounded by the news. Part of him rejoiced
that the dukes had been beaten. Part of him lamented the
loss of his sword. As Jagreen Lem had emphasised, without
the blade he was less than half a man, for his albinoism
weakened him. Already bis eye-sight was dimmer and he felt
no response in his limbs.
Jagreen Lem looked up at him.
"Enjoy the comparatively painless days left you, Eiric, but
I leave you to anticipate what I have in store for you. I must
away and instruct my men in the final preparations for the
war-fleet soon to sail against the South. I won't waste time
102
OTORMBRINGER 103
with crude torture now. for all the while I shall be scheming
the most exquisite tortures conceivable. You shall take long
years to die. I swear!"
He left the cell and as the door slammed he heard Jagreen
Lem instructing the guard.
"Keep the brazier at full blast. Let them sweat like damned
souls in bell. Feed them enough to keep them alive once every
three days. They will soon be crying for water. Give them
only sufficient to sustain their lives. They deserve far worse
than this and they'll get their desserts when my mind has had
time to work on the problem."
A day later, the real agony began. Their bodies gave out
the last of their sweat Their tongues were swollen m their
heads and all the time as they groaned in their torment, they
were aware that this terrible torture would be nothing compared
to what they might expect Eiric's weakened body
would not respond to his desperate struggling and at length
his mind dulled, the agony became constant and familiar, and
time was non-existent
Finally, through a pain-thick daze, be recognised a voice.
The hate-filled voice of Jagreen Lem.
Others were in the chamber. He felt their bands seize him
and his body was suddenly light as he was borne, moaning
from the cell.
Though he heard disjointed phrases he could make no
sense of Jagreen Lern's words.
He was taken to a dark place that rolled about, hurting his
scorched chest
Later, be heard Moonglum's voice and strained to hear the
words.
"Eirici What's happening? We're aboard a ship at sea, Fd
awearr
But Eiric mumbled disinterestedly. Gradually his deficient
body was weakening, faster than would a normal man's. He
thought of Zarozinia, whom he would never see again. He
knew he would not live to know whether Law or Chaos finally
won, or even if die Southlands would stand against the
theocrat
And tbeae problems were fading in his mind again.
Then the food started to come and die water and it revived
turn somewhat At some stage, he opened his eyes and stared
upwards into the thinly smiling face of Jagreen Lem.
104 Michael Moorcock
"Thank the gods,** said die Theocrat "I feared we'd lost
you. You're a delicate case to be sure, my friend. You must
stay alive longer than this. To begin my entertainment, I have
arranged for you to sail on my own flagship. We are now
crossing the Dragon Sea, our fleet well-protected by charms
against the monsters roaming these parts." He forwned.
*Thanks to you, we haven't the same call for the charms
which would have borne us safely through me chaos-torn
waters. They are almost normal for the moment. But that will
soon be changed.**
Eh-ic's old spirit returned for a moment and he glared at
his enemy, too weak to voice the loathing he felt.
Jagreen Lern laughed sofly and stirred Eric's gaunt white
head with the toe of his boot "I think I can brew a drug
which will give you a little more vitality."
The food was foul-tasting and had to be forced between
Eric's mumbling lips, but after a while he was able to sit up
and observe the huddled body of Moonglum. Evidently me
little man had totally succumbed to his torture. To bis surprise,
EIric discovered he was unfettered and he crawled the
agonising distance between himself and the Eastlander, shaking
Moonglum's shoulder. He groaned but did not respond.
A Shaft of dim light appeared and Biric looked up to see
mat the hatch-cover bad been prised aside and Jagreen Lem
stared down at him.
"I see the brew had its effect. Come, EIric, smell the invigorating
sea and fed the warm sun on your body. We are not
many infles from the coasts of Argimiliar and our scout-ships
report quite a sizeable fleet sailing hence."
EIric cursed. "By Arioch, I hope they send you all to the
bottom I**
Jagreen Lern pursed his lips mockingly. "By whom? Arioch?
Do you not remember what ensued in my own palace?
Arioch cannot be invoked. Not by you-not by me. Your
stinking spells saw to that**
He turned to an invisible lieutenant "Bind him and bring
him on deck. You know what to do with him.**
Two warriors dropped into me hold and grasped the stillweak
EIric, tying his arms and legs and manhandling hiffl on
to the deck. He gasped as the sun's glare struck his eyes.
"Prop him up so be may see all," Jagreen Lero ordered.
The warriors obeyed and EIric was lifted to a sending
STORMBRINGER 105
position, seeing Jagreen Lcm's huge, black flagship with its
silken deck canopies flapping in a steady westerly breeze, its
three banks of straining oarsmen and its tall ebony mast bearing
a sail of dark red.
Beyond the ship's rails, EIric saw a massive fleet surging in
the flagship's wake. As well as the vessels of Pan Tang and
Dharijor there were many from Jharkor, Shazar and Tarkesh
but on every scariet sail the Merman blazon of Pan Tang was
painted.
Depression filled EIric, for he knew that the Southlands,
however strong, could not match a fleet like this.
**We have been at sea for only three days," said Jagreen
Lem, "but thanks to a witch-wind, we're almost at our destination.
A scout ship has recently reported that the Lormyrian
navy, hearing rumours of our superior sea-power, is
sailing to join with us. A wise move of King Montan-for
the moment, at any rate. Ill make use of him for the time
being and, when his usefulness is over, HI have him killed for
the treacherous turncoat he is.**
"Why do you tell me all this?" EIric whispered, his teeth
gritted against the pain that came with any slight movement
of his face or body.
"Because I want you to witness for yourself tee defeat of
the South. I want you to know that what you sought to avert
wfll come to pass. After we have subdued the South and
sucked her of her treasures, we*M vanquish the Isle of tee
Purple Towns and press forward to sack Vilmir and flmion,
That wffl be an easy matter don't you agree?"
When EIric did not reply, Jagreen Lem gestured impatiently
to his men.
"Tie him to me mast so that he may get a good view of
the battle. HI put a protective charm around his body, for I
do not want him to be killed by a stray arrow and cheat me
of my full vengeance.**
EIric was borne up and _roped to the mast, but he was
scarcely aware of it, for his head lolled on his right shoulder,
only semi-conscious.
The massive fleet plunged onwards, certain of victory.
By mia-ufternoon EIric was aroused from his stupor by the
shout of the helmsman.
"Sad to the south-east! Lormyrian fleet approaches.**
106 Michael Moorcock
With impotent anger, Eiric saw the fifty two-masted ships,
their sails bright against the sombre scarlet of Jagreen Lem's
vessels, come into line with the others.
Lormyr, though a smaller power than Argimiliar, had a
larger navy. Eiric judged that King Mootan's treachery had
cost the south more than a quarter of its strength.
Now he knew there was absolutely no hope for the south
and that Jagreen Lem's certainty of victory was well-founded.
Night fell and the huge fleet lay at anchor. A guard came
to feed Eiric a mushy porridge containing another dose of the
revitalising drug. As he revived, his anger increased, and
Jagreen Lern paused by the mast on two occasions, taunting
him savagely.
"Soon after dawn we shall meet the southern fleet,"
Jagreen Lem smiled, "and by noon what is left of it will float
as bloody driftwood behind us as we press on to establish our
reign over those nations who so foolishly relied on their seapower
as defence."
Eiric remembered how he had warned the Icings of the
Southlands that this was likely to happen if they stood alone
against the theocrat. But he wished that he had been wrong.
With the defeat of the south, the conquest of the east seemed
bound to follow and, when Jagreen Lera ruled the world,
Chaos would dominate and the earth revert to the sniff from
which it had been formed millions of years before.
AU through that moonless night he brooded, pulling his
thoughts together, summoning all his strength for a plan that
was, as yet, only a shadow in the back of his mind.
Six
The rattle of anchors woke him.
Shaking in the light of the watery sun. he saw the southern
fleet on the horizon, riding gracefully in hollow pomp towards
the ships of Jagreen Lem.
Either, he thought, the southern kings were very brave or
else they did not understand the strength of their enemies.
Beneath him, on Jagreen Lem's foredeck, a great catapult
rested, and slaves had already filled its cup with a large hall
of flaming pitch. Normally. Eiric knew, such catapults were an
encumbrance, since when they reached that size they were
difficult to rewind and gave lighter war-machines the advantage.
Yet obviously Jagreen Lem's engineers were not fools.
Eiric noted extra mechanisms on the big catapult and realised
they were equipped to rewind rapidly.
The wind had dropped and five hundred pairs of muscles
alone strove to row Jagreen Lem's galley along. On the deck,
in disciplined order, his warriors took their posts beside the
great boarding platforms that would drop down on to opponent
ships and grapple them at the same time as they
formed a bridge between the vessels.
Eiric was forced to admit that Jagreen Lern had used foreright.
He had not relied wholly on supernatural aid. His ships
were the best equipped he had ever seen.
The southern fleet, Eiric decided, was doomed. To fight
Jagreen Lem was not bravery-it was insanity.
But Jagreen Lern had made one mistake. He had, in his
gnawing desire for vengeance, ensured that Ekic's vitality
was restored for a few hours and this vitality extended to his
mind as well as his body.
Stormbringer had vanished. With the sword he was. among
men. all but invincible. Without it, he was helpless. These
were facts. Therefore he must somehow regain the blade. But
how? It had returned to the plane of Chaos with its brothers,
107
108 Michael Moorcock
presumably drawn back there by the overwhelming force of
me rest
He must contact it
He dare not summon me entire horde of blades with spell,
that would be tempting providence too far.
He heard the sudden thwack and roar as the giant catapult
discharged its first shot. The flame-shrouded pitch went
arching over the ocean and landed short, boiling me sea
around it as it guttered and sank. Swiftly the war-engine was
rewound and he marvelled at the speed as another ball of
flaring pitch was forked into its cup. Jagreen Lcm looked up
at him and laughed.
"My pleasure will be short-mere are not enough of them
to put up a decent fight Watch them perish, Eiric!"
Brie said nothing, pretended to be dazed and frightened.
The next fireball struck one of the leading ships directly
and Eiric saw tiny figures scampering about, striving desperately
to quench the spreading pitch, but within a minute the
whole ship was ablaze, a gouting mass of flame as me figures
now jumped overboard, unable to save their vessel.
Now the air around him sounded to the rushing heat of the
fireballs and within range now, the southerners retaliated with
their lighter machines until it seemed the sky was filled with a
thousand comets and the heat almost equalled that which Eiric
had experienced in the torture chamber.
Mack smoke began to drift as the brass beaks of the ships*
rams ground through timbers, impaling ships like skewered
fish. The hoarse yells of fighting men began to sound and Eiric
heard the dash of iron as the first few opposing warriors
met
But now be only vaguely beard me sounds, for he was concenfrating.
At last he was ready and, aware that his voice would prob-
ably not be heard by human ears above the noise of war,
called in a desperate and agonising voice: "Stormbringer!"
His straining mind echoed the shout and he seemed to look
beyond the turbulent battle, beyond the ocean, beyond the
very earth to a place of shadows and terror. Something
moved there. Many things moved there.
"StormbringerI**
He heard a curse from beneath him and saw Jagreen Lem
pointing up at him.
STORMBMNGER 109
"Gag the whitefaced sorcerer." Jagreen Lcrn's eyes met Elric's
and the theocrat sucked in his tips, deliberating a bare
moment before adding: "And if that doesn't put an end to
his babbling-slay him!"
The lieutenant began to climb the mast towards Eiric.
**Stormbringerl Your master perishesi"
He struggled in the biting ropes but could hardly move.
"Stormbringer!**
All his life he had hated the sword he relied so much upon.
Now he called for it as a lover calls for his betrothed.
The warrior grasped his foot and shook it "Silence! You
beard my master."
With insane eyes, Eiric looked down at the warrior who
shuddered and drew his sword, hanging to the mast with one
hand and readying himself to make a stab at Eiric's vitals.
*Stormbringeri" Eiric sobbed the name. He must Kve.
Without him. Chaos would surely nde the world.
The man hinged at Elric*s body-yet the blade did not
reach the albino. Then Eiric remembered, with sudden humour,
that Jagreen Lcrn had placed a protective spell about
him! The Thcocrat's own magic had saved his enernyl
**Stormbringerr
Now the warrior gasped and the sword dropped from hia
fingers. He seemed to grapple with something invisible at his
throat and Eiric saw me man's fingers sliced off and blood
sport from the stumps. Then, slowly, a shape materialised
and, with bounding relief, the albino saw that it was a
word-bis own runesword impaling the warrior and sucking
out his soult
The warrior dropped, but Stormbringer hung tn the air and
men turned to slash the ropes restraining Eiric's hands and
men nestled firmly, with horrid affection, in ita master's right
fist
At once the stolen life-stuff of the warrior began to pour
through Eiric's being and the pain of his body vanished.
Quickly be grasped a piece of me sail's rigging and cut away
the rest of bis bonds until he was swinging by one hand on
tile rope.
"Now, Jagreen Lem. well sec who takes vengeance, finally."
He wrenched up (he hatch-cover and stared down at the
pitiful figure of his friend. Evidently he had been left to
starve to death. A rat scuttled away as the light shone down.
110 Michael Moorcock
Eiric jumped into the hold and saw. with horror, that part
of Moonglum's right arm had been gnawed already. He
heaved the body on to his shoulder, aware that the heart still
beat, though faintly, and clambered back on to the deck.
How to ensure his friend's safety and still take vengeance
on Jagreen Lem was a problem. But Eiric moved towards the
boarding platform which he guessed the theocrat to have
crossed. As he did so, three warriors leapt towards him. One
of them cried:
"The albino! The reaver has escaped F*
Eiric struck him down with a blow that required only a
flick of his wrist. The black sword did the rest The others retreated,
remembering how Eiric had entered Hwamgaari.
New energy flowed through him. For every corpse he
killed, his strength increased-a stolen strength, but accessary
if he was to survive and win the day for Law.
He ran, untroubled by his burden, over the boarding platform
and on to the deck of the southern ship. Up ahead he
saw the standard of Argimiliar and a little group of men
around it, headed by King Hozel himself, his face gaunt as
he stared at the knowledge of his own death. A deserved
death, thought Eiric grimly, but nonetheless when Hozel died
it would mean another victory for Chaos.
Then he heard a shout of a different quality, thought for a
moment he had been observed, but one of Hozel's men was
pointing to the North sod mouthing something.
Eiric looked in the direction and saw, with mixed emotions,
the brave sails of the Purple Towns. They were brightly
painted and gay, some even embroidered, for the only rich
decoration die Sealords allowed themselves was upon their
sails.
But they had arrived belatedly. Even if they had sailed
with the other southern vessels it would have been unlikely
mat they could have turned the day against Pan Tang.
At that moment, staring around him, Jagreen Lem saw Eiric
and bellowed at his men who moved forward warily and
reluctantly, approaching me albino in a wide semi-circle,
Eiric cursed the brave Sealords who had added a further
factor to his indecision,
Menacingly he swung the moaning runeblade about him u
he advanced to meet the half-terrified Pan Tang wrriora.
STORMBRINGER 111
They dropped back, BOOM of them groaning as the blade
touched them. The way WM now dear to Jagreen LenL
But me ships of the Purple Towns were drawing closer, almost
within catapult range.
Eiric looked directly into Jagreen Lcrn's frightened face
and snarled: "I doubt if my blade haa me strength to pierce
your burning armour with one blow, aad one blow is an I
have time for. I leave yon now, theocrat, but remember mat
even if you conquer all the world including me unknown
lands of me East, 111 have my sword drink your black soul at
length."
With that he dropped Moonglum's unconscious body overboard
acd dived after it into the choppy sea.
Resuming his hold on his friend's body, he began to swim
with superhuman strokes towards the leading vessel of the
Sealords. Kargan's ship.
Now, behind him, Jagreen Lem and his men saw their own
flagship blazing. Eiric had done his work well.
That, too, would serve to divert attention from Kargan's
fleet.
Trusting to me sealords* famed seamanship he swam
directly in the path of the leading galleon, shouting Kargan*s
name.
The ship veered slightly and he saw bearded faces at the
rail, saw ropes flicker towards him and grasped one, letting
them haul him upwards with his burden until he was pulled
over the side.
Kargan stared at him with shocked eyes.
"Eli-ici We thought you dead-and now I see you have
been, or worse!"
Eiric spat salt-water from his mouth and said urgently:
Turn your fleet, Kargani Turn it back the way it has
come, there is no hope of saving the Soutblandera-they are
doomed. We must preserve our forces for a later struggle."
Hesitating momentarily, Kargan gave the order which was
swiftly relayed to the rest of his sixty strong fleet.
As me ships turned away, Eiric noted that hardly a Southern
ship remained afloat For more than a mile the water
burned and the spluttering of the flaming, sinking ships was
blended with the screams of the maimed and drowning.
112 Michael Moorcock
"With the Southern aeapower crushed so decisively," Kargan
said, watching the physician who was tending to Moooglura,
"the lands will not last long before Pan Tang's
marching hordes. Like us, the South relied too much on its
ships. It has taught me that we must strengthen our land defences
if we are to have any chance at all."
"From now on well use your island as our main headquarters,"
Eiric said. "Well fortify the whole place and from
there keep in close touch with what is happening in the south.
How is my friend, physician?"
The physician looked up. These are no battle-made
wounds. He's been hurt sorely, but hell live. He should
recover to perfect fitness given a month or so of rest."
"He*H have it," Eiric promised. He gripped the nmesword
at his belt and wondered what other tasks lay in store for
mem before the last great battle between Law and Chaos was
joined.
Chaos would soon rule more than half me worid, in spite
of the powerful blow he had dealt it in forever sentencing the
Dukes of Hell to their own plane; the more power that
Jagreen Lem gathered, the more the threat from Chaos
would increase.
He sighed and looked Northwards.
Two days later they returned to the Isle of the Purple
Towns, the fleet remaining in the largest harbour of Utkel
since it was thought wise to have it at hand and not disperse
ft.
All that following night, Eiric talked with the Sealords, ordered
messengers to Vilmir and IImiora and, towards morning,
there came a polite knock on the door of the room.
Kargan got up to open it and stared in astonishment at the
tall, black-faced man who stood there.
"Sepiriz!" Eiric cried. "How did you come here?"
"On horseback," smiled the giant, "and you know me
power of the Nihrain steeds. I had come to warn you. We
have, at last, managed to contact the White Lords but they
can do little as yet Somehow a path to their plane must be
made through the barricades which Chaos has constructed
against them. Jagreen Lem's ships have vomited their contents
on the southern shores and his warriors swarm inland.
There is nothing we can do now to stop his conquests there.
STORMBRINGER 113
Once consolidated, his Earthly power increased, he win be
able to summon more and more allies from Chaos."
Then where does my next task lie?" Eiric asked softly.
"I am not sure yet. But that is not what I came for. Your
blade's sojourn with its brothers has strengthened it. You may
have noticed how swiftly it pours power into your body
now?"
Eiric nodded.
That power is evilly-gained and is evil in itself. The
blade's strength will continue to increase and yours will, also.
But, as Chaos-begotten power fills your being, you will have
to fight, yet more strongly, to control the force within you."
Eiric sighed and grasped Sepinz's arm.
Thanks for the warning, friend, but when I beat the
Dukes of Hell, to whom I formerly pledged allegiance, I did
not expect to escape with a mere scratch or a flesh-wound.
Know this, Sepiriz," he turned to the watching sealords, "and
know this all of you."
He drew the groaning runeblade from its scabbard and
held it aloft so that it shone and flared in its awful power.
This blade was forged by Chaos to conquer Chaos and
mat is my destiny, too. Though the world transmutes to
boiling gas I shall live. now. I swear by the Balance of the
Cosmos that Law shall triumph and New Age come to the
Earth."
Taken aback by this grim vow, the sealords glanced at one
another and Sepiriz smiled.
"Let us hope so, Eiric," he said. "Let us hope so."
BOOK THREE
Sad Giant's Shield
Thirteen times thirteen, the steps to the sad giants lair:
And the Chaos Shield lies there.
Seven time seven are the elder trees
Twelve times twelve warriors he sees
But the Chaos Shield lies there.
And the hero fair will the sad giant dare
And a red sword wield for the sad giant's shield
On a mournful victory day.
-The Chronicle of the Black Sword
One
Across the world the shadow of anarchy had fallen. Neither
god, nor man, nor that which ruled both could clearly read
the future and see the fate of Earth as the Forces of Chaos
increased their strength through the machinations of their human
minions.
From Westland mountain, over me agitated ocean to
Southland plain. Chaos now held its monstrous sway. Tormented,
miserable, unable to hope any longer for liberation
from the corroding, warping influence of Chaos, the remnants
of races fled over the two continents already fallen to the human
minions of Disorder, led by their warped Theocrat
Jagreen Lem of Pan Tang, aqufline, high-shouldered and
greedy for power, in his glowing scarlet armour, controlling
human vultures and supernatural creatures alike as he
widened his black boundaries.
Upon the face of the Earth all was disruption and roaring
anguish* save for the thinly populated, already threatened
Eastern continent and the Isle of the Purple Towns, which
now readied itself to withstand Jagreen Lem's initial onslaught.
The on-rushing tide of Chaos must soon sweep the
world unless some great force could be summoned to halt it
Bleakly, bitterly, the few who still resisted Jagreen Lern,
under the command of Eiric of Melnibone, talked of strategy
and tactics in the full knowledge that more than these were
needed to beat back Jagreen Lem's unholy horde.
Desperately, Eiric attempted to utilise me ancient sorcery
of his emperor forefathers to contact the White Lords of
Law; but he was unused to seeking such aid and, as well, the
forces of Chaos were now so strong, that those of Law could
no longer gain easy access to the Earth as they had contrived
to do in earlier times.
As they prepared for the coming fight, Eiric and his allies
117
118
Micfml Moorcock
watt about the preparation with heavy Routs and a sense of
die futility of such action. And, in the back of EIric's mind,
was the constant knowledge that even if he won against
Chaos, the very act of winning would destroy the worid be
knew and leave it ripe for the forces of Law to rule-and
there would be no place in such a worid foi the wild albino
sorcerer.
Beyond the earthly plane, in their bordering realms, the
Lords of Chaos and of Law, watched the struggle and even
they did not realise EIric's entire destiny.
Chaos triumphed. Chaos blocked the efforts of Law on
each occasion they tried to pass through the domain of
Chaos, now the only road to Earth. And the Lords of Law
shared Elite's frustration.
And, if Chaos and Law were observing the Earth and her
struggle, who watched these? For Chaos and Law were but
the twin weights in a balance and the hand that held the balance,
though it rarely deigned to interfere in their struggle,
still less in tile affairs of men, had reached the rare state of a
decision to alter the status quo. Which weight would drop?
Which rise? Could men decide? Could the Lords decide? Or
could only the Cosmic Hand remould the pattern of the
Earth, reforming her stuff, changing her spiritual constituents
and placing her on a different path, a fresh course of destiny?
Perhaps all would play some part before the outcome was
decided.
The great zodiac influencing the universe and its' Ages, had
completed its twelve cycles and the cycles would soon begin
again. The wheel would spin and, when it stopped its spinning,
which symbol would dominate, how changed would it
be?
Great movements, on the Earth and beyond it; great destinies
were being shaped, great deeds were being planned and,
marvellously, could it Just be possible that in spite of the
Lords of the Higher Worlds, in spite of the Cosmic Hasd, in
spite of the myriad supernatural denizens that swarmed the
universe, that Man might decide the issue?
Even-one man?
One man, one sword, one destiny?
Eiric of Melniboof sat hunched in his saddle, watching the
warriors bustle to and fro around him in the city square of
Bakshaan, Here, years before* be had conducted a. siege
STORMBRINGER 119
against the city's leading merchant, tricked others and left
rich. but such scores that they held against him were now forgotten,
pushed from their minds by me threat of war and the
knowledge that if Eiric's command could not save them,
nothing could. The waUs of the city were being widened and
heightened, warriors being trained in the use of unfamiliar
war-engines. From being a lazy merchant city, Bakshaan had
become a functional place, ready for battle when it came.
For a month, Eiric had been riding the length and breadth
of the eastern kingdoms of Ilmiora and Vihnir. overseeing
preparations, building the strength of the two nations into an
efficient war machine.
Now be studied parchments handed him by his lieutenants
and, recalling all the old tactical skill of bis ancestors, gave
them his decisions.
The sun set and heavy black clouds hung against a sharp,
metallic blue sky, stretching over the horizon. Eiric loosened
his cloak strings and allowed the folds of the garment to enclose
him, for a chill had come.
Then, as he silently regarded the sky to the west, be
frowned as he noticed something like a flashing golden star
appear, moving swiftly towards him.
Ever wary for signs of the coming of Chaos,, be turned in
his saddle shouting:
"Every man to his position! Ware the golden globe!"
The thing approached rapidly until soon, it was hanging
aver die city, all men looking up at it in astonishment, their
hands on their weapons. As black night fell, the clouds admitting
no moonlight, the globe began to fall towards the spires
of Bakshaan, a strange luminescence pulsing from it. Eiric
tugged Stormbringer from its scabbard and black fire nickered
along die blade as it gave out a low moaning sound. The
globe touched die cobbles of die city-square-broke into a
million fragments that glowed for a moment before vanishing.
Eiric laughed in relief, resheathing Stormbringer as be saw
who now stood in die place of die golden globe.
"Sepiriz, my friend. You choose strange means of transport
to carry you from die Gorge of Nihrain."
The tall, black-faced seer smiled, his white pointed -teem
|faM"E "I have so few carriages of dial type dial I must
only use diem when pressed. I come with news for youmuch
news."
120 Michael Moorcock
"I hope it is good, for we have enough bad to last us forever.'*
"It is mixed. Where can we converse in private?"
"My headquarters are in yonder mansion," Eiric pointed at
a richly decorated house on the far side of the squaie.
Inside, Eiric poured yellow wine for his guest Kelos the
merchant, whose house this was, had not accepted the requisitioning
altogether willingly and, partly because of this, Eiric
maliciously made free with all Kelos's best
Sepiriz took: the goblet and sipped the strong wine.
"Have you succeeded in contacting the White Lords yet,
Sepiriz?" Eiric asked.
"We have."
*Thank the gods. Are they willing to give their aid to us?**
"They have always been so willing-but they have not yet
made a sufficient breach in the protection that Chaos has set
up around the planet However, me fact that I have at last
managed to contact them is a better sign than any we've had
these past months."
"So-the news is good." Eiric said cheerfully.
"Not altogether. Jagreen Lem's fleet has set sail againand
they bead towards the eastern continent, with thousands
of ships-and supernatural allies, too."
"It was only what I expected, Sepiriz. My work's done
here, anyway, ni ride for me Isle of the Purple Towns at
once, for I must lead the fleet against Jagreen Lern."
"Your chances of winning will be all but non-existent. Elric."
Sepiriz wanied him gravely. "Have you heard of the
ShysofHeUr"
"I've heard of them-do they not sail the depths of the
ea, taking on board dead mariners as crews?**
"They do-they're things of Chaos and far larger man
even the largest mortal warship. You'd never withstand teem,
even if you did not have the theocrafs fleet to fight as well."
*Tm aware me fight wfll be hard, Sepiriz-but what else
can we do? I have a weapon against Chaoa in my blade
here.-
"Not enough, mat bodkin-you still have no protection
against Chaos. That is what I have to tell you about-a personal
armament for yourself to help you in your struggle,
though you'll have to win it from its present possessor."
*Wbo possesses it?"
STORMBR1NGER 121
**A giant who broods in eternal misery in a great castle on
me edge of the world, beyond me Sighing Desert. His name
is Mordaga who was once a god but is now made mortal for
ins he committed against his fellow gods long ages ago."
"Mortal? Yet he has lived so long?"
"Aye. Mordaga is mortal-though his life-span is considerably
longer than an ordinary man's. He is obsessed with the
knowledge mat he must one day die. This is what saddens
him."
"And the weapon?"
"Not a weapon exactly-but a shield. A shield with a purpose-one
that Mordaga had made for himself when he
raised a rebellion in the domain of the gods and sought to
make himself greatest of the gods and even wrest the Eternal
Balance from the One Who Holds It For this he was banished
to Earth and informed that he would one day dieslain
by a mortal blade. The shield, as you might guess, i&
proof against the workings of Chaos."
"How does it do this?" Eiric asked curiously.
The chaotic forces, if powerful enough, can disrupt any
defence made of lawful matter; no construction based on the
principles of order can withstand for long the ravages of
beer chaos, as we know.
"Stormbnngcr has shown you mat the only weapon effectiv;
against Chaos is something of Chaos-manufacture. The
same can be said for the Chaos Shield. This itself is chaotic
in nature and therefore there is nothing organised in it on
which me random forces can act and destroy. It meets Chaos
with Chaos, and so the hostile powers are subverted."
"I see. If I had only had such a shield of late, things might
have gone better for us all'"
"I could not tell you of it As I have mentioned, I am
merely the servant of Fate and cannot act unless it is sanctioned
by my masters. Perhaps as I have guessed they are
willing to see Chaos sweep the world before it is defeated-if
it is ever defeated-so that it can completely change the
nature of our planet before the new cycle begins. Change it
will-but whether it will be ruled in the future primarily by
Law or Chaos-that is in your bands, Eirici"
"I'm becoming used to me burden my friend. How would I
recognise this shield?**
"By the eight-arrowed Sign of Chaos which radiates from
122 Michael Moorcock
its boss. It is a heavy, round shield, made as a buckler for a
giant But, with the vitality you receive from that runesword
there, you will have the strength to carry it, have no fear. But
first you must have the courage to win it from its current
holder, Mordaga is aware of the prophecy, told him by his
fellow gods before they cast him forth."
"Are you, too, aware of it?"
"I am. In our language it forms a simple rhyme:
"Mordaga'S pride; Mordaga's doom,
Mordaga's fate shall be
To die as men when slain by men,
Four men of destiny."
"Four men? Who are the other three?"
"Those you will know of when the time comes for you to
seek the Chaos Shield. Which will you do? Go to the Purple
Towns-or will you go to find the shield?"
"I wish that I had the time to embark on a quest of that
kind, but I have not. 1 must go to rally my men, shield or
no."
"You wiU be defeated."
"We shall see. Sepuiz."
"Very well, Eiric. Since so little of your destiny is in your
own bands, we should allow you to take Just one decision at
times,** Sepiriz smiled sympathetically.
"Fate is kind," Eiric commented ironically. He rose from
his seal "111 begin the Journey straightway, for there's no
time to lose."
Two
With his milk-white hair streaming behind him and his red
eyes blazing with purpose, Eiric lashed his stallion through
the cold darkness of the night, through a disturbed land
which awaited Jagreen Lem's attack in trepidation, for it
could mean not only their deaths, but the drawing of their
souls into the servitude of Chaos.
Already the standards of a dozen Western and Southern
monarchs fluttered with Jagreea Lem's as the kings of the
conquered lands chose his command rather than death-and
placed their peoples under bis dominance so that they became
marching, blank-faced creatures with enslaved souls, their
wives and children dead, tormented or feeding the bloodwashed
altars of Pan Tang where the priests send up invocations
to the Chaos Lords, and, ever-willing to further their
power on Earth, the Lords answered with support.
And not only the entities themselves, but the stuff of their
own weird cosmos was entering the Earth, so that where their
power was, me land heaved like the sea, or the sea flowed
like lava, mountains changed shape and trees sprouted ghastly
blossoms never seen OD Earth before.
Wherever Jagreen Lern conquered, the warping influence
of Chaos was manifest. The very spirits of nature were tortured
into becoming what they should not be-air, fire, water
and earth, all became unstable, for Jagreen Lem and bis allies
were tampering not only with the lives and souls of men,
but the very constituents of the planet itself. And there were
none of sufficient power to punish them for these crimes.
None.
With this knowledge within him, Eiric's progress was swift
and wild, as he strove to reach the Isle of the Purple Towns
before his pitifully inadequate fleet sailed to do battle with
Chaos.
123
124 Michael Moorcock
Two days later he arrived in the port of Uhaio, at the tip
of the smallest of the three Vilmirian peninsulas, and took
ship at once to the Isle of the Purple Towns, where he disembarked
and rode into the interior towards the ancient fortress
Ma-ha-kil-agreu which had withstood every siege ever made
against it* and was regarded as die most impregnable construction
in the whole of the lands still free from Chaos. Its
name was in an older language than any known to those who
lived in me current Age of the Young Kingdoms. Only Eiric
knew what the name signified. The fortress had been there
long before me present races came to dominance, even before
Elite's ancestors had begun their conquerings. Ma-ha-kUagra-me
Fort of Evening, where long ago, a lonely race had
come to die.
As he arrived in the courtyard, Moonglum, the Easflander,
came rushing from the entrance of a tower.
"EIrict We have been awaiting your arrival, for time grows
acarce before we must embark against the enemy. We nave
Bent out ship-borne spies to estimate me size and power of
Jagreen Lem's fleet Only four returned and all were uselessly
insane. The fifth has Just come back, but-"
-Butwhatr
"See for yourself. He has been-altered, Eiric.**
"Alteredl Alteredl Let me see him. Take me to him." Eiric
nodded curdy to the other captains who had come out to
greet him. He passed them and followed behind Moonglum
through the stone corridors of the fortress, lit badly by spluttering
rushes.
Leading Eiric to an antechamber, Moonglum stopped outside,
running his fingers through his thick, red hair. "He is
therein. Would you care to interview him alone? Fd rather
not set eyes on him again!"
"Very wen," Eiric opened the door, wondering how this
spy would be changed. Sitting at me plain wooden table, was
me remains of a man. It looked up. As Moonglum had
warned him-it had been altered.
Eiric felt pity for the man, but he was not nauseated or
horrified like Moonghim, for in his sorcery-working he had
seen far worse creatures. It was as if the whole of one side of
me spy*s body had become at one stage viscous, had flowed,
and men coiled in a random shape. Side of head, shoulder,
arm, torso, leg, all were replaced by streamers of flesh like
STORMBRJNGER 125
rat's tails, lumps of matter like swollen boils, weirdly mottled.
The spy spread his good band and some of the streamer
eemed to jerk and wave in unison.
Eiric spoke quietly. "What magic wrought mis drastic
changer"
A kind of Chuckle came from the lopsided face.
"I entered the Realm of Chaos, lord. And Chaos did this, tt
changed me as you see. The boundaries are being extended. I
did not know it I was inside before I realised what had happened.
The area of Chaos is being widened!" He leant forward,
his shaking voice almost screaming. "With it sail the
massed fleets of Jagreen Lem-great waves of warships,
aquadrons of invasion craft, thousands of transports, shun
mounting great war engines, fire-ships-ships of all kinds,
bearing a multitude of standards-me kings of the south left
live have sworn loyally to Jagreen Lem and he has used all
their resources and his own to marshal this sea-horde! As he
ails, he extends the area of Chaos, so whereas his sailing is
dower than normal, when he reaches us here-Chaos win be
with him. I saw such ships mat could be of no earthly contriving-the
size of castles-each one seeming to be a daz*
ding combination of all coloursi"
**So be has managed to bring more supernatural allies to
his standard," Eiric roused. Those are the Ships of Hdl,
Scpiriz mentioned . . ."
"Aye-and even if we beat the natural craft." the messenger
said, hysterically, "we could not beat born the ships of
Chaos and me stuff of Chaos which boils around mem and
did to me what you observe! It boils, it warps, it changes constantly.
That is Q I know, save that Jagreen Lem and hn human
allies are unharmed by it as I was harmed. When mis
change began to take place in my body, I fled to me Dragon
Uto of Melnibone, which seems to have withstood me process
and is the only safe land in an the waters of the worid. My
body-healed-swiftly, and I chanced another sailing to
bring me here."
"You were courageous," Eiric said hoUowly. "You wfll be
wen rewarded, I promise.**
"I want only one reward, my lord.**
What is that?**
Death. I can no longer live with the horror of my body
Bdrroring the horror in my brains!"
**I will see to it," Eiric promised. He remained brooding
126 Michael Moorcock
for a few seconds before nodding farewell to the spy and
leaving the room.
Moooglum met him outside.
"It looks blade for us, Eiric." he said softly.
Eiric sighed. "Aye-perhaps I should have gone to seek the
Chaos Shield first."
"What's thatr
Eiric explained all Sepiriz had told him.
"We could do with such a defence," Moonglum agreed.
"But there it is-the priority is tomorrow*s sailing. Your captains
await you in the conference chamber.**
"I will see them in a short while," Eiric promised. "First I
wish to go to my own room to collect my thoughts. Tell them
HI )oin them when that's done."
When he reached his room, Eiric locked the door behind
him, still thinking of the spy's information. He knew that
without supernatural aid no ordinary fleet, no matter bow
large or how courageously manned, could possibly withstand
Jagreen Lem. And the fact was that he had only a comparatively
small Beet, no supernatural entities for allies, no means
of combatting the disrupting chaotic forces. If only he had
the Chaos Shield beside him now ... But it was useless to regret
a decision of the kind he'd made. If he sought the shield
now, he couldn't fight the battle in any case.
For weeks he had consulted the gnmoires that, in the form
of scrolls, tablets, books and sheets of precious metals engraved
with ancient symbols, littered his room. The Elementals
bad helped him in the past, but, so disrupted were they
by Chaos, that they were weak for the most part.
He unstrapped his hell-sword and filing it on me bed of
tumbled silks and furs. Wryly he thought back to earlier
times when be had given in to despair and how those incidents
which bad engendered the mood seemed merely gay
escapades in comparison to the task which now weighed on
his mind. Though weary, he chose not to draw Stormbringer*a
stolen energy into himself, for the feeling that was so dose to
ecstacy was leavened by the guilt-the guilt which had
possessed him since a child when he had first realised that the
expression on his remote father's face had not been one of
love, but of disappointment that he should have spawned a
deficient weakling-a pale albino, good for nothing, without
the aid of drugs or sorcery.
STORMBRINGER
127
Eiric sighed and went to the window to stare oat over the
low hills and beyond them to the sea. He spoke aloud, perhaps
subconsciously, hoping that the release of the words
would relieve some of the tension within him.
"I do not care for this responsibility,*' he said. "When I
fought the Dead God be spoke of both gods and men as
shadow-things, playing puppet-parts before the true history
of Earth began and men found their fate in their own hands.
Then Sepiriz teus me I must turn against Chaos and help
destroy the whole nature of die world I know or history
might never begin again, and Fate's great purpose would be
thwarted. Therefore J am the one who must be split and tempered
to fulfill my destiny-I must know no peace of mind,
must fight men and gods and the stuff of Chaos without surcease,
must bring about the death of this age so that, m some
far dawn-age, men who know little of sorcery or the Lords of
Ihe Higher Worlds, may move about a world where the major
forces of Chaos can no longer enter, where justice may actually
exist as a reality, and not as a mere concept in the minds
of philosophers.**
He rubbed his red eyes with his fingers.
"So fate makes Eiric a martyr that Law might rule the
world. It gives him a sword of ugly evil that destroys friends
and enemies alike and sucks their soul-stuff out to feed him
the strength he needs. It binds me to evil and to Chaos, in order
that I may destroy evil and Chaos-but it does not make
me some senseless dolt easily convinced and a willing sacrifice.
No, it makes me Eiric of Memibone and floods me with
a. mighty misery.. .**
"My lord speaks aloud to himself-and his thoughts are
gloomy. Speak them to me, instead, so that I might help you
bear them, Eiric.'*
Recognising the oft voice, but astonished nonetheless. Ellie
turned quickly towards the source and saw his wife, ZaroKinia
standing there, her arms outstretched and a look of
deep sympathy upon her young face.
He took a step towards her before stopping and saying anfrOy:
"When did you come here? Why? I told you to remain
m your father's palace at Kariaak until this business is done,
ifeverr
**H ever .. .** She repeated, dropping her arms to her sides
with a little shrug. Though scarcely more than a girl, with her
128 Michael Moorcock
full red lips and long blade: hair, die bore herself aft ft
princess must and seemed more than her age.
"Ask not that question," he said cynically. "It is not one
we ask ourselves here. But answer mine: How did you come
here and why?" He knew what her reply would be. but be
spoke only to emphasise his anger which in turn was a result
of his horror that she should have come so dose to dangerdanger
which he had already rescued her from once.
"I came with my cousin Opluk*s two thousand,** she said,
fitting her head defiantly, "when be joined the defenders of
Uhaio. I came to be near my husband at a time when he may
need my comforting. The gods know I've had little opportunity
to discover if be doesF
Eiric paced the room in agitation. "As I love you, Zarozinia,
believe that I would be in Kariaak now with you had I
any excuse at all. But I have not-you know my role, my
destiny, my doom. You bring sorrow with your presence, not
help. If this business has a satisfactory end, then well meet
again, m joy-not in misery as we now must!"
He crossed to her and took her in his arms. "Oh, Zarorinia,
we should never have met, never have married. We can
only hurt one another at this time. Our happiness was so
brief.. .-
*1f you would be hurt by me, then hurt you shall be," she
said softly, "but if you would be comforted, then I am hero
to comfort my lord."
He relented with a sigh. These are loving words, my
dear-but they are not spoken in loving times. I have put
love aside for the nonce. Try to do likewise and thus well
both dispense with added complication."
Without anger, she drew slowly away from him and with a
slight smile that had something of irony in it, pointed to the
bed. where Stormbringer lay.
"I see your other mistress stffl shares your bed," she said.
"And now you need never try to dismiss her again, for that
black Lord of Nihrain has given you an excuse to forever
keep her by your side. Destiny-is that the word? Destiny!
Ah, the deeds men have done in Destiny's name. And what is
destiny, Brie, can you answer?" i
He shook his bead. "Since you ask the question in malice,
m not make the attempt to answer it."
She cried suddenly: "Oh, Eirici I -faave travelled for many
STORMBRINGER 129
days to see you. thinking you would welcome me. And now
we speak m anger!"
"FearF he said urgently. "It is fear. not anger. I fear for
you as I fear for the fate of the world! See me to my ship in
the morning and then make speed back to Kariaak. I bee
yon." ~
"If you wish it"
She walked back into the small chamber which joined the
main one.
Three
"We talk only of defeatF roared Kargan of the Purple
Towns, beating upon the table with his fist His beard seemed
to bristle with rage.
Dawn had found all but a few of Ac captain* retiring
through weariness. Kargan* Moonglum, Etric's cousin Dyvim
Slonn and moon-faced Dralab of Tarkesh. remained in the
chamber, pondering tactics.
Eiric answered him calmly: "We talk of defeat, Kargan,
because we must be prepared for that eventuality. It seems
likely, does it not? We must, if defeat seems imminent, flee
our enemies, conserving our force for another attack on
Jagreen Lera We shall not have the forces to fight another
major batUe, so we must use our better knowledge of currents,
winds and terrain to fight him from ambush on sea or
land. Thus we can perhaps demoralise his warriors and take
considerably more of them man they can of us.**
"Aye-I see the logic," Kargan rumbled unwillingly, evidently
disturbed by this talk for, if me major battle was lost,
then lost also would be the Isle of the Purple Towns, bastion
against Chaos for the minly"<* nations of Vumir and Dnuora.
Moonglum shifted his position, granting slightly. "And if
they drive us back, men back we must go, beading rather
than breaking, and returning from other directions to attack
and confuse them. Ifs in my mind that well have to move
more rapidly than we*Q be able to, since we'd be tired and
with few provisions ..." He grinned faintly, "Ah, forgive
me for my pessimism. Ill-placed. I fear."
"No," Brie said. "We must face all this or be caught unawares.
You are right And to allow for ordered retreat, I have
already sent detachments to die Sighing Desert and the
Weeping Waste to bury large quantities of food aod such
130
STORMBRINGER. 131
dungs as extra arrows, lances and so forth. If we are forced
back as far as the barrens, we'll likely fare better than
fagreen Lern, assuming that it takes him time to extend the
area of Chaos and that his allies from the Higher Worlds are
not overwhelmingly powerful."
"You spoke of realism . . ." said Dyvim Slonn, pursing
his curving lips and raising a slanting eyebrow.
"Ay-but some things cannot be faced or considered-for
if we are totally engulfed by Chaos at me outset, then well
nave no need of plans. So we plan for the other eventuality,
you see."
Kargan let out his breath and rose from the table. There's
no more to discuss," he said. TU to bed. We must be ready
to sail with the noon tide tomorrow."
They all gave signs of assent and chairs scraped as they
pushed them back and left the chamber.
Bereft of human occupants, the chamber was silent save
for the sputtering of the lamps and the rustle of the maps and
, papers as they were stirred by a warm wind.
It was late in the morning when EIric arose and found
Zarozinia already up and dressed in a skirt and bodice of
doth-of-gold with a long black-trimmed cloak of silver flowing
from her shoulders and spreading to the floor.
He washed, shaved and ate the dish of herb-flavoured fruit
she handed him.
"Why have you arrayed yourself in such finery?" he asked.
*To bid you goodbye from the harbour," she said.
*Tf you spoke truth last night, then you'd best be dressed in
furneral red." he smiled and then. relenting, clasped her to
him. He gripped her tightly, desperately, before standing back
from her and taking her chin in his hand raised her face to
tare down into it "In Ihese tragic times,** he said, "there's
tittle room for love-play and kind words. Love must be deep
and strong, manifesting itself in our actions. Seek no courtly
words from me, Zarozinia, but remember earlier nights when
the only turbulence was our pulse-beats blending."
He was clad, himself, in Melnibonean war regalia, with a
breastplate of shiny black metal, a high-collared jerkin of
black velvet, black feather breeks covered to the knee by his
boots, also of black leather. Over his back was pushed a
cloak of deep red, and on one thin, white finger, was the
Ring of Kings, the single rare actorious stone set in silver.
132 Michael Moorcock
His long white hair hung loose down to hia ihoulders, kept
from his eyes by a bronze circlet in which were set other precious
charm stones of peryx, mio and golden otredos.
Stoimbringer was sheathed at his left hip and an ebonyhandled
poignard dangled at his right. Upon the table, among
the open books, a tapering black helm, engraved with old
runes, lay, its crown gradually rising into a spike, iitandmg almort
two feet from the base. At this base, dominating the
eye-slits, was a tiny replica of a spread-winged dragon, with a
gaping snout, a reminder that, as wen as being Emperors of
the Bright Empire, Eiric's ancestors were Dragon Masters
over all that remained of the dragon kind. Brie, himaelf, was
chief master-though now only his cousin Dyvim SIorm
knew the dragon speech and spells, the rest having perished
in various ways since the Sack of Imrryr years before when
Eiric, turned renegade, had led the attack upon the Dreaming
City.
Now he picked up the helm and fitted it over his head so
that it covered the top half of his face, only bis red eyes
gleaming from its shadows. He refrained from pulling the
side wings about his lower face but for the meantime, left
uiem sweeping back from the bottom of the helmet
Noting her silence, he said, with a heart already heavy,
"Come, my love, let's to the harbour to astound these undercivilised
allies of ours with our elegance. Have no fear mat I
shall live to survive this day's battle-for Pate has not finished
with me yet and protects me as a mother would her
SOB-so that I might witness further misery until such a day
when ifs over for all time.**
Together, they left the Fort of Evening, riding on magical
Nihrain horses, down to the harbour where me other Sealords
and captains were already assembled beneath me bright sun.
All were dressed in their finest martial glory, though none
could match Eiric. Old racial memories were awakened in
many when they saw him and they were troubled, fearing
him without knowing why, for their ancestors had had great
cause to fear the Bright Emperors in the days when Melnibone
ruled the worid and a man accoutred as Eiric commanded
a mffiion eldritch warriors. Now a bare handful of
Imrryiana greeted him as he rode along me quayside, noting
me ships riding at anchor with their coloured banners and
heraldic devices lifting proudly in the breeze.
Dyvim Slonn was equipped in a close-fitting dragon helm,
STORMBRINGER 133
its protecting pieces fashioned to represent the entire bead of
a dragon, scaled in red and green and silver. His armour was
lacquered yellow, though the rest of his dress was black, like
Elric*s. At his side was Stonnbringer's sister-sword Moumblade.
As Eiric rode up to the group, Dyvim Slonn turned.hia
heavily armoured head towards the open sea. There was little
inkling of encroaching Chaos on the calm water or in the
dear sky.
"At least well have good weather on our way to meet
Jagreen Lern," Dyvim SIorm said.
"A small mercy." Eiric smiled faintly. "Is there any more
news of their numbers?**
"Before the spy who returned yesterday died he said there
'were at least four thousand warships, ten thousand
transports-and perhaps twenty of the Chaos ships. They'll
be me ones to watch since we've no idea what powers they
have."
Eiric nodded. Their own fleet comprised some five thousand
warships, many equipped with catapults and other heavy
war-engines. The transports, though they turned me odds, in
numbers, to a far superior figure, would be slow, unwieldy.
and of not much use in a pitched sea-battle. Also, if the
battle were won, they could be dealt with later, for (hey
would obviously follow in the rear of Jagreen Lcrn's warned
So, for all Jagreen Lern's numerical strength, there would
be a good chance of winning a sea-fight under ordinary conditions.
The disturbing factor was the presence of the supernatural
ships. The spy's description had been vague. Eiric
aeeded more objective information-information he would be
unlikely to receive now, until the fleets joined in battle.
In his shirt was tucked me beast-hide manuscript of an ex'
traordinarily strong invocation used in summoning the Sea
King. He had already attempted to use h, without success,
but hoped that on open sea his chances would be better, particularly
since me Sea King would be angered at the disruption
Jagreen Lern and his occult allies were causing in the
balance of nature. Once before, long ago, the Sea King had
aided him and had, Eiric recalled, predicted that Eiric would
ammonium again.
134 Michael Moorcock
Kargan, in the thick: but light sea-armonr of his people
which gave him the appearance of ft hairy-faced armadillo,
pointed as several small boats detached tbemselve* from Ac
fleet and sailed towards die quay.
"Here come the boats to take us to our ships, my lordal"
The gathered captains stirred, all of them with serious expressions,
seeming, each and every one, to be pondering some
personal problem, staring into the depths of their own
hearts-perhaps trying to reach me fear which lay there; trying
to reach it and tear it out and fling it from them. They all
had more than the usual trepidation experienced when facing
a fight-for, like Brie, they could not guess what the Chaos
ships were capable of.
They were a desperate company, understanding that something
less palatable than death might await them beyond the
horizon.
Eric squeezed Zarozinia's arm.
"Goodbye."
Tareweu, Brio-may whatever benevolent gods Acre are
left on the Earth protect you."
"Save your prayers for my companions,** he said quietly.
"for they wffl be less able than I to face what lies out there."
Moonghnn called to him and Zarozmia: "Give her a kiss,
Eric, and come to the boaL Tell her well be back with victory
tidings'"
Eiric would never have admitted such familiarity, not even
with his kinsman Dyvnn Slonn, from anyone but Moonglum.
But he took it in good part saying softly to her: "There, you
see, little Moonglum is confident-and he*s usually we one
with warnings of ominous portent!"
She said nothing, but kissed him lightly on roe mouth,
grasped his hand for a moment and then watched him as he
strode down the quay and clambered into the boat which
Moonglum and Rargan were steadying for him.
The oars splashed and bore the captains towards me flagship,
Timber-tearer, Eiric standing in the bow staring ahead,
looking back only once when the boat drew alongside the
ship and he began to climb the rope ladder up to the deck,
his black helm bobbing,
Bracing himself on the deck, Brie watched me backs of
the warrior-rowers as they bent to the oars, supplementing
STORMB RINGER 135
the light wind which filled the great purple sail, making it
curve out in a graceful billow.
The Isle of the Purple Towns was now out of sight and
green, glinting water was all that was visible around the fleet,
which stretched behind the flagship, its furthest ships tiny
shapes in the distance.
Already the fleet was re-forming into the five squadrons
which would comprise its final battle-order. Each squadron
was under the command of an experienced Sealord, from the
Purple Towns, for most of the other captains were landsmen
who, though quick to learn, had little experience of sea tactics.
Moonglum came stumbling along the swaying deck to
stand beside his friend.
"How did you sleep last night?" he asked Eiric.
**WeU enough, save for a few nightmares."
"Ah, then you shared something with us all. Sleep was
hard won for everyone, and when it came it was troubled.
Visions of monsters and demons crowded my dreams."
Eiric nodded slightly, but paying little attention to Moonglum.
The elements of chaos in their own beings were evidently
awakening in response to the approach of the Chaos
horde itself. He hoped they would be strong enough to withstand
the actuality as they had survived their dreams.
"Disturbance to for'ardF
It was the look-out's cry, baffled and perturbed. Eiric
cupped his hands around his mouth and tilted his head back.
"What sort of disturbance?"
"It's like nothing I've ever seen, my lord-I can't describe
it"
Eiric turned to Moonglum. "Relay the order through the
fleet-slow the pace to one drum-beat in four, squadron commanders
stand by to receive final battle orders." He strode
towards the mast and began to climb up it towards the lookout's
post. He climbed until he was high above the deck. The
took-out swung out of his cradle, since there was room only
for one-
'Ts it the enemy, my lord?" he said, as Eiric clambered
into his place. Eiric stared hard towards the horizon, making
out a kind of dazzling blackness that from time to time sent
up sprawling gouts of stuff into the air where it hung for
some moments, before sinking back into the main mass.
136 Michael Moorcock
Smokey, hard to define, it crept gradually nearer, crawling
over the sea towards them.
"It'g the enemy," said Eiric quietly.
He remained for some while m the look-out's cradle, studying
the chaos-stuff as it filing itself about in the distance like
some amorphous monster in its death-agonies. But these were
not death-agonies-not for Chaos at any rate.
From this vantage point, Eiric also had a dear view of the
fleet as it formed itself into its respective squadrons, making
up a black wedge nearly a mile across at its longest point and
nearly two mOes deep. His own ship was a short distance in
front of the rest, well in sight of the squadron commanders.
Brie shouted down to Kargan. whom he saw passing the
mast: "Stand by to move ahead, Kargan!"
The Sealord nodded without pausing in his stride. He was
folly aware of the battle-plan, as they all were for they had
discussed it long enough. The leading squadron, under the
command of Eiric, was comprised of their heaviest warships
which would smash into the centre of the enemy fleet and
seek to break its order, aiming particularly at the ship of
Jagreen Lero. If Jagreen Lem could be slain or captured,
their victory would be more likely.
Now the dark stuff was closer and Eiric could just make
out me sails of the first vessels, spread out one behind the
other. Then, as they came even closer, he was aware mat to
each side of this leading formation were great glinting shapes
that dwarfed even the huge battlecraft of Jagreen Lern.
The Chaos Ships'
Eiric recognised them, now, from his own knowledge of
occult lore.
These were the ships said normally to saQ the deeps of the
oceans, taking on drowned sailors as crews, captained by
creatures that had never been human. It was a fleet from the
deepest, gloomiest parts of the vast underwater domain which
had. since the beginninp of time. been disputed territory-disputed
between water-elementals under their king Straasha and
the Lords of Chaos, who claimed the sea-depths as their main
territory on Earth by right Legends said that at one time
Chaos had ruled the sea and Law the land. This. perhaps, explained
the fear of the sea that many human beings had, and
me pull the sea had for others.
But the fact was that, although the elementals had
STORMBRINGER 137
succeeded In winning the shallower portions of the sea, the
Chaos Lords had retained the deeper parts by means of this,
their fleet of the dead. The ships themselves were not of
earthly manufacture, neither were their captains originally
from earth, but their crews had once been human, and were
now indestructible in any ordinary sense.
As they approached, Eiric was soon in no doubt that they
were, indeed, those ships.
The Sign of Chaos flashed on their sails, eight amber arrows
radiating from a central hub-signifying the boast of
Chaos, that it contained all possibilities whereas Law was
supposed, in time, to destroy possibility and result in eternal
stagnation. The sign of Law was a single arrow pointing upwards,
symbolising direction and control.
Eiric knew that in reality. Chaos was the real harbinger of
stagnation, for though it changed constantly, it never
progressed. But, in his heart, he felt a yearning for this state,
for he had many loyalties to the Lords of Chaos in the past
and his own folk of Meloibone had worked, since their inception,
to further the aims of Chaos.
But now Chaos must make war on Chaos; Eiric must turn
against those he had once been loyal to, using weapons
forged by chaotic forces to defeat those selfsame forces in
this time of change.
He clambered from the cradle and began to ship down the
mast, leaping the last few feet to land on the deck as Dyvim
SIorm came up. Quickly be told his kinsman what he had
seen.
Dyvim Slorm was astounded. "But the fleet of the dead
never comes to the surface-save for..." his eyes widened.
Eiric shrugged. "That's the legend-the fleet of the dead will
rise from the depths when the final struggle comes, when
Chaos shall be divided against itself, when Law shall be weak
and mankind shall choose sides in the battle that will result
in a new Earth dominated either by total Chaos or by almost-total
Law. When Sepiriz told us this was the case, I felt
a response. Since then, in studying my manuscripts, I have
been fully reminded."
"Is this, then, the final battler*
"It might be," he said. "It is certain to be one of the last
when it will be decided for all time whether Law or Chaos
shall rule here."
138 Michael Moorcock
"If we're defeated, then Chaos will undoubtedly rule."
"Perhaps-but remember that the struggle need not be decided
by battles alone."
"So Sepiriz said, but if we're defeated this day, well have
little chance to discover the truth of that." Dyvim Slorm
gripped Mouroblade's hilt. "Someone must wield these
blades-these destiny swords-when the time conies for the
deciding duel. Our allies dimmish, Elite."
**Aye. But I*ve a hope that we can summon a few others.
Straasha, King of the Water Elementals, has ever fought
against the death fleet-and he is brother to Graoll and
Misha, the Wind Lords. Perhaps through Straasha, I can
summon his unearthly kin. In this way we will be better
matched, at least"
"I know only a fragment of the spell for summoning the
Water King," Dyvim Slorm said.
"I know the whole rune. I had best make haste to meditate
upon it, for our fleets will clash in two hours or less and then
ni have no time for the summoning of spirits but Will have
to keep tight hold on my own less some Chaos creature releases
it**
Eiric moved towards the prow of the ship, and, leaning
over, stared into the ocean depths, turning his mind inward
and contemplating the strange and ancient knowledge which
lay there. He became almost hypnotised as he lost contact
with his own personality and began to identify with the swiriing
ocean below.
Involuntarily, old words began to form in his throat and
his Ups began to move in the rune which his ancestors had
known when they and all the elementals of the Earth bad
been allies and sworn to aid one another long ago in the
dawn of the Bright Empire, more than ten thousand years before.
"Waters of the sea, thou gave us birth
And were our milk and mother both
In days when skies were overcast
You who were first shall be the last*
"Sea-rulers, fathers of our blood,
Thine aid is sought, thine aid is sought,
STORMBRINGER 139
Your salt is blood, our blood your sail,
Your blood the blood of Man.
"Straasha, eternal king, eternal sea
Thine aid is sought by me;
For enemies of thine and mine
Seek to defeat our destiny, and drain away our sea."
The spoken rune was merely a vocalisation of the actual
invocation which was produced mentally and went plunging
Into the depths, through the dark green corridors of the sea
until it finally found Straasha in his domain of curving,
coral-coloured, womb-like constructions which were only partially
in the natural sea and partially in the plane where the
demeatals spent a large part of their immortal existence.
Straasha knew of the Ships of Hell rising to the surface
nd had been pleased that his domain was now cleared of
them, but Elite's summons awakened his memory and he
remembered the folk of Mehuboo6 upon whom all the elementals
had once looked with a sense of comradeship; he
remembered the ancient invocation, and felt bound to answer
ft, though he knew his people were badly, weakened by the effect
Chaos had had in other parts of the world. Not only humans
had suffered; the elemental spirits of nature had been
orely pressed as well.
But he stirred so that water and the stuff of his other plane
" were both disturbed. He summoned some of his followers and
began to glide upwards into the domain of the Air.
Semi-conscious now, Eiric knew that his invocation had
Bet with success. Sprawled in the prow, he waited.
At last the waters heaved and broke and a great green figure,
with turquoise beard and hair, pale green skin that
eemed made of the sea itself, and a voice that was like a
rushing tide.
Once more Straasha answers thy summons, mortal. Our
destinies are bound together. How may I aid thee, and, in
ffding thee, aid myself?
" In the throat-torturing speech of the elemental, Eiric antwered,
telling the sea king of the forthcoming battle and
What it implied.
So at long last it has come to pass! I fear I cannot aid you
Wwch, for my folk are already suffering terribly from the de-
140 Michael Moorcock
preaations of our mutual enemy. We shall attempt to did you
if we can. Thafs all I promise.
The sea king sank back into the waters and Eiric watched
him depart with a feeling of acute disappointment. It was
with a brooding mind that he left the prow and went to the
main cabin to tell his captains the news.
They received it with mixed feelings, for only Dyvim
Slonn was used to dealing with superoaturals. Moonglum had
always been dubious of Eiric's powers to control his wild, elemental
friends, while Kargan growled that Straasha may have
been an ally of Eiric's folk but had been more of an enemy
to his. The four of them, however, could plan with slightly
more optimism and face the coming ordeal with better confidence.
Four
The fleet of Jagreen Lera bore towards them and* in its wake,
the boiling stuff of Chaos hovered.
Eiric gave the command and die rowers hauled at their
curs, sending Timber-tearer rushing towards the enemy. So
far his elemental allies had not appeared, but he could not afford
to wait for them.
As Timber-tearer rode the foaming waves, Eiric hauled bi
sword from its scabbard, brought the side wings of his helmet
round to cover his face and cried the age-old ululating warshout
of Melnibone, a shout full of joyous evil. Stormbringer'a
eerie voice joined with his, giving vent to a thrumming song,
anticipating the blood and the souls it would soon feast upon.
Jagreen Lem*s flagship now lay behind three rows of meno'-war
and behind that the ships of death.
Timber-tearer's iron ram ripped into the first enemy ship
and the rowers leaned on their oars, backing away and turning
to pierce another ship below the water line. Showers of
arrows sprayed from the holed ship and clattered on deck
and armour. Several rowers went down.
Eiric and his three companions directed their men from the
main deck and suddenly they saw the streaking balls of green
fire come curving out of the sky.
"Prepare to quench fireal" Kargan yelled and the group of
men already primed for this leapt for the tubs containing a
special brew,which Eiric bad told them how to make earlier.
This was spread on decks and splashed on canvas and, when
the fire-balls landed, they were swiftly put out by the stuff.
"Dont engage unless forced to," Eiric called to the
eamen, "keep aiming for the flagship. If we take that our advantage
will be goodF
"Where are your allies, Eiric?*' Kargan asked sardonically,
shuddering a little as he saw the Chaoa stuff in the distance
141
142 Michael Moorcock
suddenly move and erupt tendrils of black matter into the
sky.
"They'll come, never fear," Eiric answered, but he was unsure.
Now they were in the thick of the enemy fleet, the ships
of their squadron followed behind. The war-engines of their
own fleet sent up a constant barrage of fire and heavy stones.
Only a handful of Bine's craft broke through the enemy's
first rank and reached the open sea, sailing towards Jagreen
Lem*s flagship.
As they were observed, the enemy ships sailed to protect
the flagship and the scintillating ships of death, moving with
fantastic speed for their size, surrounded the theocrat'a vessel.
Shouting over the waters, Kargan ordered their diminished
squadron into a new formation.
Moonglum shook his head in astonishment "How can
things of that size support themselves on the water?" he said
to Eiric.
EIric said: **It's unlikely that they actually do.** As thenship
manoeuvred into its new position, he stared at die huge
craft, twenty of them, dwarfing everything else on the sea.
They seemed covered with a kind of scintillating wetness
which flashed all the colours of the spectrum so that their
outlines were hard to see and the shadowy figures moving
about on their gigantic decks could not easily be observed.
Whisps of dark stuff began to drift across the scene, close
to the water, and Dyvim Slonn, from the lower deck, pointed
and shouted:
"See! Chaos comes. Where is Straasha and his folk?"
Eiric shook his head, perturbed. He had expected aid by
now.
"We cannot wait. We must attackl" Kargan's voice was
pitched higher than usual.
A mood of bitter recklessness came upon Eiric then he
smiled. "Come then. Let's do sol"
Speedily the squadron coursed towards tike disturbing ships
of death.
Moonglum muttered: "We are going to our doom, Eiric.
No man would willingly get close to those ships. Only the
dead are drawn to them, and they do not go with joyF
But Eiric ignored bis friend.
A strange silence seemed to come upon the waters so that
STORMBRINOER
143
the sound of the splashing oars was sharp. The death fleet
waited for them, impassively, as if they did not need to
prepare for battle.
He tightened his grip on Stormbringer. The blade seemed
to respond to the pounding of his pulse-beat, moving in his
hand with each thud of his heart as if linked to it by veins
and arteries.
Now they were so close to me Chaos ships that they could
make out better the figures crowding the great decks. Horribly,
Eiric thought he recognised some of the gaunt faces of
toe dead and, involuntarily, he called to the sea-folk's king.
"StnashaT'
The waters heaved, foamed and seemed to be attempting
to rise but then subsided again. Straasha beard-but he was
finding it difficult to fight against the forces of Chaos.
"Straashar'
It was no good, the waters hardly moved.
A mood of wild despair came over Eiric. He screamed to
Kargan: "We cannot wait for aid. Swing the ship round the
Chaos fleet and we'll attempt to. reach Jagreen Lero's flagship
from the rearf
Under Kargan^s expert direction, the ship swung to avoid
Hie Ships of Hell in a wide semi-circle. Spray cascaded
against Eiric's face, flooding the decks. He could hardly see
through it as they cleared the Chaos ships which had now engaged
other craft and were altering the nature of their timbers
so that they fell apart and the unfortunate crews were
drowned or warped into alien shapes.
To his ears came the miserable cries of the defeated and
the triumphantly surging thunder of the Chaos Fleet's music
as it pushed forward to destroy the eastern ships.
Timber-tearer was rocking badly and was hard to control,
but at last they were around the hell fleet and bearing down
oa Jagreen Urn's vessel from the rear.
Eiric, having but recently been a prisoner upon it, recogmsed
it at once. Now they nearly struck the theocrat's vessel
with their ram, but were swept off-course and had to manoeuvre
again. Arrows rose from the enemy's decks and
thudded and rattled on their own. They retaliated as, riding a
huge wave, they slid alongside the flagship and flung out
grappling irons. A few held, dragging them towards the theoent's
vessel as the men of Pan Tang strove to cut the grap-
144 Michael Moorcock
pling ropes. More ropes followed and then a boarding
platform fell from its harness and landed squarely on Jagreen
Lena's deck. Another followed it.
EIric ran for (he nearest platform. Kargan behind him, and
they led a body of warriors over it, searching for Jagreen
Lera.
Stormbrmger took a dozen lives and a dozen souls before
EIric had gained the main-deck. There a respleodant commander
stood, surrounded by a group of officers. But it was
not Jagreen LernEiric
clambered up die gangway, slicing through a warrior's
waist as the man sought to block his path. He yelled at
the group: "Where's your cursed leader? Where's Jagreen
LernP*
The commander's face was pale for he had seen in the past
what EIric and his hell-blade could do.
"He's not here, EIric, I swear.**
''What? Am I to be thwarted again? I know you are lyingi"
EIric advanced on the group who backed away, their swords
ready.
"Our theocrat does not need to protect himself by means
of lies, doom-fostered one!** sneered a young officer, braver
man the rest.
**Perhaps not," cried EIric with a wDd laugh as he rushed
towards him swinging Stormbrmger in a shrieking arc, **but
at least Til have your life before I put the truth of your
words to die test My sword and I need revitalising-and
your soul should make an appetiser before I take Jagreen
Lern'sl**
The man put up his blade to block Stormbringer's swing.
The runesword cut through the metal with a triumphant cry,
swung back again and plunged itself into the officer's side. He
gasped, but remained standing with his hands clenched.
"Nol" he groaned. "Oh. not my soull No!** His eyes
widened, tears streamed from them and madness came into
them for a second before Stormbrmger satiated itself and EIric
drew it out, replenished. He had no sympathy for the
man. "Your soul would have gone to the depths of hell in
any case," be said lightly. "But now I've put it to some use at
least"
Two other officers scrambled over the rail, seeking to escape
their comrade's fate.
CTORMBRINGER 145
EIric hacked at the hand of one so that he fen, screaming,
to the deck, his hand still grasping me rail. The other he
skewered in the bowels and, as Stormbrmger sucked out bis
oul, he hung there, pleading incoherently, in an effort to
avert the inevitable.
So much vitality flowed into EIric now. that as he rushed
at the remaining group around the commander, be seemed almost
to fly over the deck and rip into them, slicing away
Umbs as if they were stalks of Sowers, until he encountered
the commander himself.
The commander said softly, weakly: "I surrender. Do not
takemysouL"
"Where is Jagreen Lera?"
The commander pointed into the distance, where the Chaos
, fleet could be seen creating havoc amongst the eastern ships.
-a *ThereI He sails with Lord Pyaray of Chaos whose fleet that
Is. You cannot reach him there for any man not protectedor
not already dead-would turn to flowing, liquid flesh once
he neared the fleet"
That cursed hellspawn still cheats me," EIric spat "Here's
payment for your information-"
C Without mercy for one of those who had wasted and eaT
slaved two continents, EIric struck his blade through the ornate
armour and, delicately, with all me old malevolence of
bis sorcerer ancestors, tickled the man's heart before finishing
, him.
He looked around for Kargan, but could not see him. Then
he saw that the Chaos fleet had turned backl At first he
" thought it was because Straasha had at last brought aid, but
then he saw that the remnants of his fleet were fleeing.
Jagreen Lera was victorious. Their plans, their formations.
their courage-none of these had been capable of withstanding
the horrible warpings of Chaos.
And now the dreadful fleet was bearing down on me two
flagships, locked together by their grapples. There was no
chance of cutting one of them free before the fleet arrived.
EIric yelled to Dyvhn Slorm and Moonglum whom he saw
naming towards him from the other end of the deck.
"Over we side! Over the side for your lives-and swim as
far as you can away from here, the Chaos fleet comesi"
They looked at him, startled, teen realised me truth of his
- ." words. Other men of both sides were already leaping into the
146 Michael Moorcock
Moody water. Eiric aheatbed his sword and dived. The left
was cold, for all'the warm blood in it. and he gasped as he
swam in the direction of Moonglum*s red head, which he
could see ahead, and, dose to it, Dyvim Slorm's honeycoloured
hair.
He turned once and saw the very timbers of the two ships
begin to melt, to twist and curl in strange patterns as the
Ships of Hell arrived. He felt very relieved he had not been
aboard.
He reached his two friends.
-A short-term measure this.*' said Moonglum. spitting
water from his mouth. "What now, Eiric? Shall we strike for
the Purple Towns?" Moonglum's capacity for facetiousness
had not. it seemed, been limited by witnessing the defeat of
their fleet and the advance of Chaos. The Isle was too far
away.
Then, to their left they saw the water froth and form itself
into what was to Eiric a familiar shape.
"Straashal"
I could not aid thee, I could not aid thee. Though I tried,
my ancient enemy was too strong for me. Forgive me. In recompense
let me take you and your friends back with me to
my own land and save you, at least from Chaos.
"But we cannot breathe beneath the seal"
You wiS not need to.
"VerywelL"
Trusting to the elemental's words, they allowed themselves
to be dragged beneath the waters and down into the cool,
green depths of the sea, deeper and deeper until no sunlight
filtered mere and all was wet darkness and they lived, though
at normal times the pressure would have crushed them.
They seemed to travel for miles through the mysterious underwater
grottoes until at last they came to a place of coralcoloured
rounded constructions that seemed to drift Slowly in
a sluggish current Brie knew it by a description in one of his
grimoires. The domain of Straasha die Sea King.
The elemental bore them to the largest construction and
one section of it seemed to fade away to admit teem. They
moved now through twisting corridors of a delicate pink texture,
slightly shadowed, no longer in water. They were now
on the plane of the elemental folk. In a huge circular cave,
they came to rest
STORMBRINGER 147
With a peculiar rushing sound, the Sea King walked to a
large throne of milky jade and sat upon it, his green head on
his green fist
"Eiric. once again I regret I was unable, after all, to aid
you. All I can do now is have some of my folk carry you
back to your own land when you have rested here for a
while. We are all, it seems, helpless against this new strength
which Chaos has of late."
Eiric nodded. "Nothing can stand against its warping influence-unless
it is the Chaos Shield."
Straasha straightened his back. "The Chaos Shield. Ah, yes.
It belongs to an exiled god, does it not? But his castle is virtually
impregnable."
"Why is that?"
"It lies upon the topmost crag of a tall and lonely mountain.
reached by one hundred and thirty-nine steps. Lining
these steps are forty-nine ancient elder trees, and of these you
would have to be specially wary. Also he has a guard of one
hundred and forty-four warriors."
"Of the warriors I would certainly be wary. But why the
elders?"
"Each elder contains the soul of one of Mordaga's followers
who was punished thus. They are malevolent trees-ever
ready to take the life of anyone that comes into their
domain."
"A hard task, to get that shield for myself," Eiric mused.
"But get it I must, for without it Fate's purpose would be forever
thwarted-and with it I might have vengeance on the
one who commands the Chaos Fleet-and Jagreen Lern who
sails with him."
"Slay Pyaray, Lord of the Fleet of Hell, and, lacking his
direction, the fleet itself would perish. His life-force is contained
in a blue crystal set in the top of his head and striking
at that with a special weapon is the only means of killing
him."
"Thanks for that information," Eiric said gratefully. "For
when the time comes, I shall need it."
"What do you plan to do, Eiric?" Dyvim Slonn asked.
"Put all else aside for the moment and see the sad giant's
shield. I must-for if I do not have it. every battle fought
will be a repetition of the one we have Just lost"
"I will come with you, Eiric," Moonglum promised.
"I also," said Dyvim Storm.
148 Michael Moorcock
"We shall require a fourth if we are to carry out the
prophecy," Eiric said. "I wonder what became of Kargan."
Moonglum looked at the {round. "Did you not notice?"
"Notice wfaat?"
"On board Jagreen Lcrn's flagship when you were hewing
about you in an effort to reach the main deck. Did you not
know, then, what you had done-or rather what your cursed
word did?**
Eiric felt suddenly exhausted. "No. Did ^-did it-*B
him?"
"Aye.**
"Gods!" He wheeled and paced the chamber, slapping his
fist in his palm. "Still this hell-made blade exacts its tribute
for the service it gives me. Still it drinks the souls of friends.
Tis a wonder you two arc still with me!**
"I agree it's extraordinary," Moonglum said feelingly.
"I grieve for Kargan. He was a good friend.*'
"Eiric." Moonglum said urgently. "You know that Kargan's
death was not your responsibility. It was fated."
"Aye, but why must I always be the executioner of fate? I
hesitate to list the names of the good friends and useful allies
whose souls my sword has stolen. I hate it enough that it
must suck souls out to give me my vitality-but that it should
be most partial to my friends, that is what I cannot bear. I've
half a mind to venture into the heart of Chaos and mere
sacrifice us both I The guilt is indirectly mine, for if I was not
so weak I must bear such a blade, many of those who have
befriended me might be alive now.**
"Yet the blade's major purpose seems a noble one,** Moonglum
said in a baffled voife. "Oh, I fail to understand an
this-paradox, paradox upon paradox. Are the gods mad or
are they so subtle we cannot fathom the workings of their
minds?"
"It's hard enough at times like these to remember any
greater purpose," Dyvim Slorm agreed. "We are pressed so
sorely, that we haven't a moment for thought, but must fight
the next battle and the next. forgetting often why it is we
fight."
"Is the purpose, indeed, greater and not lesser,** Eiric
smiled bitterly. "If we are the toys of the gods-are not perhaps
the gods themselves mere children?"
"These questions are of no present importance,'* said
Straasha from his throne.
149
STORMBRINGER
-And at least.** Moonglum told Eiric. "future generations
wfll thank Stormbringer if so(r) fulfills her destiny."
"If Sepiriz is right." Eiric said. "future generations wifl
know nothing of any of us-blades or men!"
"Perhaps not consciously-but in the depths of their souls
they will remember us. Our deeds will be spoken of as belonging
to heroes with other names, that is all.**
"That the worid forgets me is all I ask," Eiric sighed.
As if growing impatient with this fruitless discussion, the
Sea King rose from his throne and said: "Come, 1 will make
certain that you are transported to land, if you have no objection
to travelling back in the same manner as you came
berer*
"None," said Eiric.
Five
They staggered wearily on to the beach of the Isle of the
Purple Towns and Eiric turned back to address the Sea King,
who remained in the shallows.
"Again I thank you for saving us. Lord of the Sea." he said
respectfully. "And thanks also for telling me more of the sad
giant's shield. By this action you have perhaps, given us the
opportunity to make certain that Chaos will be swept away
from the ocean-and the land, also."
Aahh, the Sea King nodded, yet even if you are successful
and the seats unspoiled, it wul mean the passing of us both,
wul it not?
True."
Then let it be so, for I at least am weary of my long existence.
But come-now I must return to my folk and hope to
withstand Chaos for -a little longer. Farewell!
And the Sea King sank into the waves again and vanished.
When they eventually reached the Fortress of Bvening.
heralds ran out to assist them.
"How went the battle? Where is the fleet?** one asked
Moonglum.
"Have the survivors not yet returned?"
"Survivors? Then . . . ?"
"We were defeated." Eiric said hollowly. "Is my wife stffl
here?"
"No. she left soon after the fleet sailed, riding for Karlaak."
"Good. At least we shall have time to erect new defences
against Chaos before they reach that far. Now, we must have
food and wine. We must devise a fresh plan of battle."
"Battle, my lord? With what shall we fight?"
*We shall see," Eiric said, 'we shall see."
Later, they watched as the battered remnants of the fleet
150
STORMBRINGER 151
began to sail into the harbour. Moonglum counted despairingly.
Too few." he said. "This is a black day."
From behind them in the courtyard a trumpet sounded.
"An arrival from the mainland,** Dyvim Storm said.
They strode together down to the courtyard, in time to see
a scarlet-clad archer dismounting from his horse. His nearfleshless
face might have been carved from bone. He stooped
with weariness.
Eiric was surprised. "Rackhirl You command the Dmioran
coast Why are you here?"
"We were driven back. The Theocrat launched not one
fleet but two. The other came in from the Pale Sea and took
us by surprise. Our defences were crushed. Chaos swept in
and we were forced to See. The enemy has established itself
less than a hundred miles from Bakshaan and marches across
country-if march is the word, rather it ftows. Presumably it
expects to meet up with the army the Theocrat intends to
land here."
"Aaahh, we are surely defeated . . .** Moongluffl*s voice
was little more than a sigh.
"We must have that shield, Eiric," Dyvim Slorm said.
Eiric frowned, his heart sinking. "Any further steps we
take against Chaos will be doomed unless we have its protection.
You, Rackhir, will be the fourth man in the prophecy."
"What prophecy?"
"Ill explain later. Are you fit enough to ride back with us
now?"
"Give me two hours to sleep and then I wffl be."
"Good. Two hours. Make your preparations, my friends,
for we go to claim the sad giant's shield I"
It was not until three days* later that they met the first survivors,
many of them with bodies twisted by Chaos, straggling
along a white road that lead towards Jadmar, a city still
free.
Of them. they learned that half Dmiora. parts of Vflmir
and the tiny independent kingdom of Org, had all fallen.
Chaos was closing in, its shadow spreading more and more
swiftly as its conquests increased.
It was with relief that Eiric and bis companions finally
reached Kariaak to find it so far not under attack. But reports
placed the armies of Chaos less than two hundred miles
away and marching in that direction.
152
Michael Moorcock
Zarozinia greeted EIric with trou ble-tingcd Joy.
There were rumours you were dead-killed to the sea
battle.** EIric clasped her to him.
"I cannot stay long," be said, "I have a mission beyond the
Sighing Desert."
1 know."
**you know? How?"
"Scpiriz was here. He left a gift m our stables for yon.
Four Nflirain horses."
"A useful gift. They wai carry us far more swiftly than
any other beasts. But wffl that be swift enough? I hesitate to
leave you here with Chaos encroaching at such a rate."
"You must leave me, EIric. If all seems lost here, we shall
flee into the Weeping Waste. Even fagreen Lern can have
scant interest in the barrens."
"Promise me that you wilL**
"I promise."
Feeling a little more relieved. EIric took her by the hand.
**I spent the most restful period of my life in this palace," he
said. "Let me spend this last night with you and perhaps we
shall find a little of the old peace we once bad-before I ride
on to the sad giant's lair."
So they made love, but when they slept, their dreams were
so full of dark portent that each wakened the other with their
groans so that they lay side by side, clinging to one another
until the dawn, when EIric rose, kissed her lightly, clasped
her hand and then went to the stables where he found bis
friends waiting-around a fourth figure. It was Sepiriz.
"Sepiriz, wanks for your gift. They will probably make the
difference between our being too late or not," EIric said sin-
cerely. "But why are you here now?"
"Because I can perform another small service before your
main journey begins," said the black seer. "AH of you save
Moonglum have weapons endowed with some special power.
EIric and Dyvim Slonn have their runeblades, Rackhir, the
Arrows of Law, which the sorcerer Lamsar gave him at (he
time of the Siege of Tanelorn-but Moongtum*s weapon has
nothing save the skill of its bearer."
"I think I prefer it thus," retorted Moonglum. "I've seen
what a charmed blade can take from a man.**
"I can give you nothing so strong-nor so evil-aa
Stormbringer," Sepiriz said. "But I have a charm for your
STORMBRINQER 153
; aword, a slight one that my contact with me White Lords has
^ enabled me to use. Give me your sword, Moonglum."
i1--- A trifle unwillingly, Moonglum unsheathed his curved steel
< Made and banded it to the Nihrain who took a small engravfag
tool from his robe and, whispering a rune, scratched
. several symbols on the sword near its hilt Then he gave it
back to the Eastlaoder.
"There. Now the sword has the blessing of Law and you
; wul find it more able to withstand Law's enemies."
EIric said impatiently. "We must ride now, Sepiriz, for
tfane grows desperately short."
;, **Ride, men. But be wary for patrolling bands of Jagreen
. ^ Lem's warriors. I do not think they will be anywhere along
^your route when you journey there-but watch for them
coming back.**
.'- They mounted die magical Nihrain steeds which bad
Jt, helped EIric more man once, and rode away from Karlaak
^ by the Weeping Waste. Rode away perhaps for ever.
<" In a short while they had entered me Weeping Waste, for
& flus was the quickest route to the Sighing Desert.
f; Rackhir alone knew this country well. and he guided them.
:^ The Nihrain steeds, treading the ground of their own
|Ltrange plane, seemed literally to fly for it could be observed
H.1hat their hooves did not touch the damp grasses of the
|t Weeping Waste. They moved at incredible speed and Rackll-liir,
until he became used to the pace, gripped his reins tightly.
:|f1 In this place of eternal rainfall, the land ahead was difficult
^to see, and the drizzle spread down their faces and into their
: | eyes as they peered through it. trying to make out the high
. -mountain range, which ran along the edge of the Weeping
^ Waste, separating it from the Sighing Desert.
^' Then at last. after a journey of a day, they could observe
ly the high crags with their tops lost in cloud and soon, thanks
to me marvellous speed of the Nihrain stallions, they were
; riding through the deep gorges and the rain ceased until, on
'Ihe evening of the second day. the breeze became warm and
finally harsh and hot as they left the mountains and felt the
femoua rays of the sun blazing down on them, knowing they
had come to the edge of the Sighing Desert. This wind
coughed constantly over the barren sand and rocks, its continuous
sighing giving the desert its name.
They protected their faces, particularly their eyes, with
154 Michael Moorcock
their hoods as best they could, for the stinging sand was ever
present
Resting only for a few hours at a time. Rackhir directing
them, they allowed the horses to cany them at ten times the
speed of ordinary steeds, further and further into the depths
of the vast desert
They spoke little, for it was difficult to be heard over the
sighing wind, and each man became sunk into himself, dwelling
on personal thoughts.
Brie had long since fallen into what was virtually a
mindless trance, letting the horse carry him over the desert
He had fought against his own churning thoughts and emotions,
finding it hard, as he often did, to retain any objective
impression of his predicament His past had been too troubled,
his background too morbid for him to do much now to
see clearly.
Always he had been a slave to his melancholic emotions,
his physical failings and to the very blood flowing in his
veins. He saw life not as a consistent pattern, but as a series
of random events. He had fought all his life to assemble his
thoughts and, if necessary, accept the chaotic nature of
mings, learn to live with if but, except in moments of extreme
personal crisis, had rarely managed to think coherently
for any length of time. He was, perhaps, because of his outlawed
life, his albinoism, his very reliance on his runesword
for strength, obsessed with the knowledge of his own doom.
What was thought, he asked himself, what was emotion?
What was control and was it worth achieving? Better, maybe,
to live by instinct than to theorise and be wrong; better to remain
the puppet of the gods, letting them move you this way
and that at their pleasure than to seek control of your own
fate, dash with the will of the Lords of the Higher Worlds
and perish for your pains.
So he considered as he rode into the searing lash of the
wind, already striving against natural hazard. And what was
the difference between an earthly hazard and me hazard of
uncontrolled thought and emotion? Both held something of
the same qualities.
But his race, though they had ruled me world for ten thousand
years, had lived under the dominance of a different star.
They had been neither true men nor true members of the ancient
races who had come before men. They were an intermeSTORMBRINGER
155
diary type and Eiric was half-oonsciously aware of this;
.. aware that be was the last of an inbred line who had, without
; effort uaed Chios-given sorcery as others used their earthly
dolls-for convenience. His race had been of Chaos, having
no need of elf-control or the aelf-restrictions of the new
laces who had emerged with the Age of me Young Kingdoms,
and even these, acrording to the seer Sepiriz, were not
the true men who would one day walk an Earth where order
" and progress might become the rule and Chaos rarely exert
Influence-if Brie triumphed, destroying the world he knew.
-"- This thought added to his gloom, for he had no destiny but
death, no purpose save what fate willed. Why fight against if
| why bother to sharpen his wits or put his mind in order when
't.hc was little more than a sacrifice on the altar of destiny?
| He breathed deeply of the hot dry air and expelled it from
lUs stinging lungs, spitting out me clogging sand which bad
laaanaged to enter his mouth and nostrils.
Dyvim SIonn shared something of Eiric's mood, though his
feelings were not so strong. He had a more ordered life man
had Eiric, though they were of the same blood. Whereas Eiric
bad questioned me custom of his folk, even renounced kingifaip
that he might explore the new lands of me Young Kingdoms
and compare their way of life with his own, Dyvim
Slorm had never indulged in such questioning. He had suffered
bitterness when through Eiric's renegade activities, the
Dreaming City of Imrryr, last stronghold of me old race of
Ikfelnibone, bad been razed; shock, too, of a kind, when he
|md what remained of the Imrryrians had been forced out
lato me world, also, to make their living as mercenaries of
mose they considered upstart kings of lowly and contemptible
peoples. Dyvim Slorm, who had never questioned, did not
question now, though be was disturbed.
. Moonglum was less self-absorbed. Since the time, many
-years before, when he and Eiric bad met and fought against
me Dharzi together, he had felt a peculiar sympathy, even
empathy, with his friend. When Eiric sank into such moods
as we one be was in now, Moonglum felt tormented only because
he could not help him. Many times he had sought me
means of pulling Eiric out of his gloomy depression, but
f these days be had learned that it was impossible. By nature
t cheerful and optimistic, even he felt dominated by me doom
'? which was on them.
156 Michael Moorcock
Rackhir. too, who was of a calmer and more philosophical
frame of mind than his fellows, did not feel capable of fully
grasping the implications of their mission. He had thought to
spend the rest of bis days in contemplation and meditation in
the peaceful city of Tanelorn, which exerted a strange calming
influence on all who lived there. But this call to aid in the
fight against Chaos had been impossible to ignore and he had
unwillingly strapped on his quiver of Arrows of Law and
taken up his bow again to ride from Tanelom with a small
party of those who wished to accompany him and offer their
services to Eiric.
Peering through the sand-filled air he saw something loom"
ing ahead-a single mountain rising from the wastes of the
desert, as if placed there by means other than natural.
He called, pointing: "Eirici There) That must be Mordaga's
castleF
Eiric roused himself and let his eyes follow Rackhir's
pointing hand. "Aye," he sighed. "We are there. Let us pause
now and rest, recuperating our strength before we ride the final
distance."
They reined in their steeds and dismounted, easing their
aching limbs and stretching their legs to allow the blood to
flow freely again.
They raised their tent against the wind-blown sand and ate
their meal in a mood of companionship, created by the
knowledge that after they reached the mountain, they might
never we one another alive again.
Six
The steps wound up around me mountain. High above they
could see the gleam of masonry and, just where the steps
curved and disappeared for the first time, they saw an elder
tree. It looked like an ordinary tree. but it became a symbol
for them-there was their initial antagonist How would it
fight? What influence would it exert on them?
Eiric placed a booted foot on the first step. It was high,
built for the feet of a giant.
He began to climb, the other three following behind him.
Now, as he reached the tenth step, he unsheathed Stormbringer,
felt it quiver and send energy into him. The climbing
instantly became easier.
As he came close to the elder, he heard it rustle, saw that
mere was an agitation in its branches. Yes, it was certainly
sentient.
He was only a few steps from the tree when he heard
Dyvim SIorm shout: "Gods! The leaves'-look at the leavesi"
The green leaves, their veins seeming to throb in the sunlight,
were beginning to detach themselves from me branches
and drift purposefully towards the group.
One settled on Eiric's bare hand. He attempted to brush it
off, but it clung. Others began to settle on different parts of
his body. They were coming in a green wave now, and he felt
a peculiar stinging sensation in his hand. With a curse be
peeled it off, and to his horror saw that tiny pin-pricks of
blood were left where it had been. His body twitched in
nausea and be ripped the rest from his face, slashing at others
with his crooning runesword. As they were touched by the
blade, so they shrivelled, but they were swiftly replaced.
He knew, instinctively, that they were sucking not only
blood from his veins, but the soul-force from his being; be
was weakening slightly already.
157
158 Michael Moorcock
Behind him, his companions were experiencing the same
with yells of terror.
These leaves were being directed and he knew where the
direction came from-the tree itself. He clambered up the remaining
steps, fighting off the leaves which swarmed like locusts
around him. With grim intention he began hacking at
the trunk which gave out an angry groaning and the branches
sought to reach him. He slashed them away and then plunged
Stonnbringer deep into the tree. Sods of earth spattered upwards
as the roots threshed. The tree screamed and began to
heel over towards him as if, in death, it sought to kill him
also. He wrenched at Stonnbringer. which sucked greedily at
the half-sentient tree's life-stuff, failed to tug the sword out,
and leapt aside as the tree crashed down over the steps,
barely missing him. One branch slashed his face and drew
blood. He gasped and staggered, feeling the life draining
from him.
As he stumbled towards the fallen tree, he saw that the
wood was suddenly dead and the remaining leaves had
shrivelled.
"Quickly," he gasped as the three came up, "shift this
thing. My sword's beneath and without it I'm dead!"
Swiftly they set to work and rolled the peculiarly light tree
over so that Eiric could weakly grasp the hilt of Stonnbringer
still imbedded therein.
As he did so he almost screamed, experiencing a sensation
of tremendous force. Energy filled him, pulsed through him
so that he felt like a god himself.
He laughed as if possessed by a demon and the others
looked at him in astonishment.
"Come, my friends, follow me. I can deal with a million
such trees now!"
He leapt up the steps as another shoal of leaves came
towards him. Ignoring their bites, he went straight for the
elder itself and, as if part of the sword, aimed for its centre.
Again this tree screamed.
"Dyvim Slorm!" he shouted, drunk on its life-force. *'Do an
I do-let your sword drink a few such souls and we're invincible!"
"Such power is scarcely palatable," Rackhir said, brushing
dead leaves from his body as Eiric withdrew his sword again
and ran towards the next. The elders grew thicker here and
STORMBRINGER 159
they bent their branches to reach him, looming over him, the
branches like fingers seeking to pluck him apart.
Dyvim Slorm, a trifle less spontaneously, imitated Eiric'a
method of despatching the tree-creatures and soon he too became
filled with the stolen sous of the demons imprisoned
within the elders and his wfld shout joined Eiric's as, like
fiendish woodsmen, they attacked again and again, each victory
lending mem more strength so that Moonglum and
Rackhir looked at one another with wonder and a trace of
fear to see such a terrible change come over their friends.
But there was no denying that their methods were effective
against the elders. Soon they looked back at a waste of fallen,
blackened trees spreading down the mountain-side.
All the old unholy fervour of the dead kings of Melnibone
was in the faces of the two kinsmen as they sang old battlesongs,
their twin blades joining in the harmony to send up a
disturbing melody of doom and malevolence!
His lips parted to reveal his white teeth, his red eyes Mazing
with dreadful fire. his milk-white hair streaming in the
burning wind, Eiric flung up his sword to the sky and turned
to confront his companions.
"Now, friends, see how the ancient ones of Melnibone conquered
man and demon to rule the world for ten thousand
years!"
Moonglum thought that he merited the nick-name of Wolf
gained in the west long since. All the chaos-force that was
now within him had gained complete control over everything
else. He realised that Eiric was no longer split in his loyalties,
there was no conflict in him now. His ancestors' Mood dominated
him and he appeared as they must have ages since
when all other races of mankind fled before them, fearing
their magnificence, their malice and their evil. Dyvim Slorm
seemed equally as possessed and Moonglum sent up a heartfelt
prayer to whatever kindly gods remained in the universe
that Eiric was his ally and not his enemy.
They were close to 'the top now, Eiric and his cousin
springing ahead with superhuman bounds. The steps terminated
at the mouth of a gloomy tunnel and into the darkness
rushed the pair, laughing and calling to one another.
Less speedily, Moonglum and Rackhir followed, the Red
Archer nocking an arrow to his bow.
Etric peered into the gloom, his head swimming with the
160 Michael Moorcock
power that seemed to burst from every pore of his body. He
heard the clatter of armoured feet coming towards him, and,
as they approached, he realised that these warriors were but
human. Though nearly a hundred and fifty, they did not
daunt him. As the first group rushed at him, he blocked
blows easily and struck them down, each soul taken making
only a fraction's difference to the vitality already in him.
Shoulder to shoulder stood the kinsmen, butchering the soldiers
like so many children. It was dreadful to the eyes of
Moonglum and Rackhir, as they came up to witness the flood
of blood which soon made the tunnel slippery. The stench of
death in the close confines became too much as Eiric and
Dyvim SIorm moved past the first of the fallen and carried
the attack to the rest.
Rackhir groaned. Though they be enemies and the servants
of those we fight, I cannot bear to witness such slaughter.
We are not needed here, friend Moonglum. These are
demons waging war, not men!"
"Aye," sighed Moonglum as they broke out into sunlight
again and saw the castle ahead, the remaining warriors reassembling
as Eiric and Dyvim Slorm advanced menacingly,
with malevolent joy, towards them.
The air rang with the sounds of shouting and steel dashing.
Rackhir aimed an arrow at one of the warriors and
launched it to take the man in the left eye. Til see that a
few of them get a cleaner death," be muttered* nocking another
arrow to me string.
As Eiric and his kinsman disappeared into the enemy
ranks, others, sensing perhaps that Rackhir and Moonglum
were less of a danger, rushed at the two.
Moonglum found himself engaging three warriors and discovered
that his sword seemed extraordinarily light and gave
off a sweet, clear tone as it met the warriors* weapons, turning
them aside speedily. The sword supplied him with no energy,
but it did not blunt as h might have and the heavier
swords could not force it down so easily.
Rackhir had expended au his arrows in what had virtually
been an act of mercy. He engaged me enemy with his sword
and killed two, taking Moonglum's third opponent from behind
with an upward thrust into the man's side and through
to bis heart.
Then they went with little stomach into me main fray and
STORMBRINGER 161
f SKW that already the turf was littered with a great many
'" corpses.
Rackhir cried to Eiric: "Stop! Eiric-let us finish these.
You have no need to take their souls. We can kill them with
".more natural methods!"
^ But Eiric laughed and carried on his work.
As Eiric finished another warrior and there were no others
in the immediate area, Rackhir seized him by the arm.
"Eiric-"
Stormbringer turned in Eiric's hand, howling its satiated
., glee, and clove down at Rackhir.
""- Seeing his fate, Rackhir sobbed and sought to avoid the
^ Mow. But it landed in his shoulder blade and sheared down
^ to his breast-bone.
"Eiric!" he cried. "Not my soul, too!"
And so died the hero Rackhir the Red Archer, famous in
me Eastlands, cloven by a treacherous blade. By the friend
whose life he had saved, long ago when they bad first met
near the city of Ameeron.
Then came realisation. Eiric tried to tug the sword away
but it was too late. Again he had involuntarily slain one close
to him while in the power of his runesword.
"Oh, Rackhir!" he cried, kneeling beside the body and taking
it in bis arms. The stolen energy still pulsed in him, but
his great grief no longer gave it the same control over him.
^. Tears streamed down Eiric's tortured face and a great,
t, racking groan came from him.
-^ "Once more." he muttered, "once more. Will it never
k cease?"
s
[, Beyond him, his two remaining companions stood on op-
M posite sides of the field of the slain. Dyvim Slorm had done
^ with slaying, but only because there were none left to kill. He
-., was gasping^ staring around him half in bewilderment Moon-
' glum stared at Eiric with horrified eyes which yet held a
;, fleam of sympathy for his friend, for he knew well Eiric's
\ doom and knew mat the life of one close to Eiric was the
' price Stormbringer demanded for supplying the albino with
his vitality.
"Rackhir! No gentler hero was there, no man more desirous
of peace and order than you!" Eiric raised himself to his
feet and turned to look at the huge castle of granite and
Milestone, which stood in enigmatic silence as if awaiting bis
162 Michael Moorcock
next action. On the battlements of the topmost turret he
could make out a figure which could only be a giant.
"I wear by your stolen soul, Rackhir. that what you
wished to come to pass shall come to pass, though I, a thing
of Chaos, achieve iL Law wffl triumph and Chaoa win be
driven back! Anned with awotd and shield of Chaos forging I
shall do battle with every fiend of hell if needs be. Chaos was
the indirect cause of your death. And Chaos will be punished
for it But first, we must take Ac shield."
Dyvim Slorm, not realising quite what had happened,
shouted In exultation to bu Unmnan "Eiric-lefs viait the
sad giant nowF
But Moonglum, coming up to gaze down on me ruined
body of Rackhir. murmured: "Aye, Chaos is me cause, Eiric.
Ill join in your vengeance with a will so long as." he shuddered,
*Tm spared from me attentions of your hell-blade."
Together, three abreast, tfaey marched through we open
portal of Mordaga's castle and were hnmfdintdy in a rich
and barbaricauy furnished hall.
"Mordaga!" Eiric cried. "We have come to fulfill a
propbccyi We await you.'*
They waited impatiently, until at last, a bulky figure came
through a great arch at the end of the vast hall.
Mordaga was as taD aft two men, but his back was slightly
stooped. He had long, curling black hair and was dad in *
deep blue smock, belted at the waist Upon his great feet
were simple leather sandals. His black eyes were fun of a sorrow
such as Moonglum had only wen before in Eiric's eyes.
Upon the sad giant's arm was a round shield which bora
upon it me eight amber arrows of Chaos. It was of a silvery
green colour and very beautiful. He had no other weapons.
"I know me prophecy,** he said m a voice that was like a
lonely, roaring wind. "But still I must seek to avert it Will
you take the shield and leave me in peace, human? I do not
want death."
Eiric felt a kind of empathy for sad Mordaga and he knew
something of what me fallen god must feel at mis moment
"The prophecy says death," be said softly.
"Take the shield." Mordaga lifted ft off his mighty arm and
held it towards Eiric. 'Take the shield and change fate this
once."
Eiric nodded. "I will."
STORMBRINGER 163
With a tremendous sigh, the giant deposited me Chaos
Shield upon the floor.
"For thousands of years I have lived in the shadow of that
prophecy," he said, straightening his back. "Now, though I
die in old age, I Shan die in peace and, though I once did not
think so, I shaD welcome such a death after all mis time, I
mink."
"You may not die thus. with your shield's protection
gone," Eiric waroed him, "for Chaos comes and will engulf
you as it wQl engulf everything unless I can stop it But at
least, it seems, youll be in a more philosophic frame of mind
to meet it"
"FareweB and I thank you," said the giant turning and he
plodded back towards the entrance through which he had
come.
As Mordaga disappeared, Moonglum dashed forward on
fleet feet and followed him through the entrance before either
|h Eiric or Dyvim Slorm could cry out or stop him.
| Then they beard a single shriek that seemed to echo away
J^into eternity, a crash which shook the hall and then the foot-
^ fall returning.
lit; Moonglum reappeared in the entrance, a bloody sword in
^ his hand.
||| Unable to understand this uncharacteristic action, Eiric
1^ was silent merely staring at me Eastlander as he approached
_. down the hall-
^'- "It was murder," said Moonglum simply. "I admit it I
Ij, took him in the back before he was aware of it. It was a
H' good, quick death and he died whilst happy. Moreover it was
|| a better death than any his minions tried to mete to us. It
^ was murder, but it was necessary murder in my eyes."
^ "Whyr said Eiric, still mystified.
h Grimly, Moonglum continued: "He had to perish as fate
^' decreed. We are servants of fate, now, Eiric, and to divert it
,^ in any small way is to hamper its aims. But more than that it
^ was me beginning of my own vengeance taking. If Mordaga
 had not surrounded himself with such a host, Rackhir would
not have died."
Eiric shook his head. "Blame me for that, Moonglum. The
giant should not have perished for my own sword's crime."
"Someone had to perish," said Moonglum steadfastly, "and
164 Michael Moorcock
since the prophecy contained Mordaga's death, he was the
one. Who else, here, could I kill, Eiric?"
Eiric turned away. "I wish it were I," he sighed. He looked
down at the great, round shield with its shifting amber arrows
and its mysterious silver-green colour. He picked it up easily
enough and placed it on his arm. It virtually covered his
body from chin to ankles.
"Come, let's make haste and leave this place of death and
misery. The lands of Umiora and Vumir await our aid-if
they have not already wholly fallen to ChaosI"

It was in the mountains separating the Sighing Desert from
the Weeping Waste, that they first learned of the fate of the
last of the Young Kingdoms. They came upon a party of six
tired warriors led by Lord Voashooo, Zarorinia's father.
"What has happened?" Eiric asked anxiously. "Where is
Zarozinia?"
"Our continent has fallen to Chaos, Eiric. As for Zarozinia,
I know not if she's lost, liead or captured.**
"Did you not seek for her?" Eiric said accusingly.
The old man shrugged. "My son. I have looked upon so
much horror these past days mat I am now bereft of emotion.
I care for nothing but a quick release from all this. The
day of mankind is over on the Earth. Go no further than
here, for even the Weeping Waste is beginning to change before
the crawling tide of Chaos. It is hopeless."
"Hopelessi No! We still live-perhaps Zarozinia stin lives.
Did you hear nothing of her fate?"
"Only a rumour that Jagreen Lern had taken her aboard
the leading Chaos ship.**
"She is on the seas, perhaps?"
**No-those cursed craft sail land as well as sea, if it can
be told apart these days. It was they who attacked Kariaak,
with a vast horde of mounted men and infantry following behind.
Confusion prevails-youTI find nothing but your death
back there, my son."
"We shall see. I have some protection against Chaos at
long last, plus my sword and my Nihrain steed." He turned
in the saddle to address his companions. "Well, friends, will
you stay here with Lord Voashoon or accompany me into the
heart of Chaos?"
"Well come with you," Moonglum said quietly, speaking
for them both. "We've followed you until now and our fates
are linked with yours in any case. We can do nought else."
165
166 Michael Moorcock
"Good. Farewell, Lord Voashoon. If you would do a service,
ride over the Weeping Waste to Eahmir and the Unknown
Kingdoms where Moonglum's homeland lies. Tell
them what to expect, though they're probably beyond rescue
now."
"I wBl try," said Voashoon wearily, "and hope to arrive
there before Chaos."
Then Eiric and his companions were off, riding towards the
massed hordes of Chaos-three men against the unleashed
forces of darkness. Three foolhardy men who had pursued
their course so faithfully that it was inconceivable for them to
flee now. The last acts must be played out whether howling
night or calm day followed.
The first signs of Chaos were soon apparent as they saw
the place where lush grassland once had been. It was now a
yellow morass of molten rode that, though cool, rolled about
with a purposeful air. The Nihrain horses, since they did not
actually gallop on the plane of Earth at all, crossed it with
comparative ease and here the Chaos Shield was first shown
to work, for as they passed the yellow liquid rock changed
and became grass again for a short time.
They met once a shambling thing that still had limbs of
sorts and a mourn that could speak. From this poor creature
they learned that Kariaak was no more, that it had been
churned into broiling nothingness and where ft had been the
forces of Chaos, both human and supernatural, had set up
their camp, their work done. The thing also spoke of something
that was of particular interest to Eiric. Rumour was
that the Dragon Isle of Melnibon6 was the only place where
Chaos had been unable to exert its influence.
"If, when our business is doae, we can reach Melnibone,"
Eiric said to his friends as they rode on, "we might be able to
abide until such a time that the White Lords can help us.
Also there are dragons slumbering in the caves-and these
would be useful against Jagreen Lem if we could waken
them."
"What use is it to fight mem now?" Dyvim Slorm said defeatedly.
"Jagreen Lem has won, Eiric. We have not fulfilled
our destiny. Our role is over and Chaos rules."
"Does it? But we have yet to fight it and test its strength
against ours. Let us decide then what the outcome has been."
STORMBRINGER 167
t Slorm looked dubious, but he said nothing.
| Oeo, at last, they came to the camp of Chaos.
i,
portal nightmare could encompass such a terrible
^'tbe towering Ships of Hell dominated the place as
aved it from a distance, utterly horrified by the
Kitmg names of all colours seemed to flicker every-
r the camp, fiends of all kinds mingled with the
evilly beautiful Dukes of Hell conferred with the
kings who had allied themselves to Jagreen Lem
 now regretted it. Every so often, the ground
I erupted and any human beings unfortunate
pte be in the area were either engulfed and totally
IBM) or else had their bodies warped in indescribable
|te noise was dreadful, blending of human voices and
'Chaos sounds, devil's wailing laughter and, quite of-
^tortured scream of a human soul who had perhaps
KN> choice of loyalty and now suffered madness. The
''W disgusting, of corruption, of blood, and of evil.
bIpB of Hell moved slowly about through the horde
^ tferetcbed for miles, dotted with great pavilions of
flheir silk banners fluttering, hollow pride compared to
(fat of Chaos. Many of the human beings could
{te told from the Chaos creatures, their forms were
tad under the influence of Chaos.
Stuttered to his friends as they sat in their saddles
"It is obvious that the warping influence of Chaos
a stronger among the human ranks. This will coneven
Jagreen Lern and the human leaders will lose
lance of humanity and become Just a fraction of
stuff of Chaos. This will mean the end of the
-mankind will pass away forever, taken into the
I^Ook upon the last of mankind, my friends, save for
^ Soon it will be indistinguishable from anything else.
F Unstable Earth is beneath the heel of the Lords of
 soon will be-and they are gradually absorbing it
realm, into their own plane. They will first re-
1 then steal the Earth altogether; it will become just
p of clay for them to mould into whatever gros
take their fancy."
seek to stop that," Moonglum said hopelessly.
Eiric!"
168 Michael Moorcock
**We must continue to strive, until we are conquered. I
remember that Straasha the Sea King, said, if Lord Pyaray,
commander of the Ships of Hell, is slain, the ships themselves
will no longer be able to exist I have a mind to put that to
the test Also I have not forgotten that my wife may be
prisoner aboard his ship, or that Jagreen Lem is there. I have
three good reasons for venturing there."
"No, Bind It would be more than suicide)**
"I do not ask you to accompany me."
 "If you go, we shall come, but I like it not"
"No-if one man cannot succeed, neither can three. I shall
go alone. Wait here for me. If I do not return, then try to get
to Melnibone."
"But Biric-!" Mbongium cried and then watched as. his
Chaos Shield pulsing, Eiric spurred his Nihrain steed towards
the camp.
Protected against the Influence of Chaos, Eiric was sighted
by a detachment of warriors as he neared the ship which was
his destination. They recognised him and rode towards him
shouting.
He laughed in their faces, half-maddened by the sights,
smells and sounds around him. "Just the fodder my blade
needs before we banquet on yonder ship!" he cried as he
slashed off the first man's head as if it were a buttercup.
Secure behind his great round shield, he hewed about him
with a will. Since Stonnbrmger had slain roe gods imprisoned
in the elder trees, the vitality which the sword passed into
him was almost without limit, yet every soul that Biric stole
from Jagreen Lern's Warriors was another fraction of vengeance
reaped. Against men, he was invincible. He split one
heavily armoured warrior from bead to crutch, sheared
through the saddle and smashed the horse's backbone apart.
Then the remaining warriore dropped back suddenly and
Eiric felt his body tingle with peculiar sensations, knew he
was in the area of influence exerted by me Chaos ship and
knew also that he was being protected against it by his shield.
He was now partially out of his own earthly plane and existed
between his worid and the world of Chaos. He dismounted
from his Nihrain steed and ordered it to wait for him. There
were ropes trailing from the huge sides of the Ship and Eiric
saw with horror that other figures were climbing up themand
he recognised several as men he had known in Karlaak.
STORMBMNGER 169
Even now the Chaos ship was still recruiting its crew from
the ranks of the dead!
He joined the ghastly ranks and swarmed with them up the
tides of me great gleaming ship, grateful at least for the
cover they gave him.
He reached the ship's rail and hauled himself over h, spitting
bile from his throat as he entered a peculiar region of
darkness and came to the first of a series of decks that rose
like steps to the topmost one where he could see me occupants-a
manlike figure and something like a huge, blood-red
octopus. The first was probably Jagreen Lern. The second
was obviously Pyaray, for this, Eiric knew, was the guise he
took when he manifested himself on Earth.
Contrasting with me ships seen from the distance, once
aboard Eiric became conscious of the dark, shadowy nature
of me light filled with moving threads, a network of dark
reds, blues, yellows, greens and purples which, as be moved
through te, gave and re-formed itself behind him.
He was constantly being blundered against by the moving
cadavers and he made a point of not looking at their faces
' too closely, for be had already recognised several of the searraiders
whom he had abandoned years before, during the escape
from Imrryr.
Slowly he was gaining the top deck, noting that so far,
both Jagreen Lern and Lord Pyarary seemed unaware of his
presence. Presumably they considered themselves entirely free
from any kind of attack now they had conquered all me.
 known worid. He grinned maliciously to himself as he conrin-
ned climbing, gripping the shield tightly, knowing that if once
he lost hold of it. his body would become transformed either
into some shambling alien shape or else flow away altogether
to become absorbed into the Chaos stuff.
By now Eiric had forgotten everything but his main object
which was to kill Lord Pyaray. He must gain the top-most
deck and deal first with the Lord of Chaos. Then he would
kill Jagreen Lem and, if she were really there, rescue Zarozania
and bear her to safety.
Up the dark decks, through the nets of strange colours, Eiric
went, his milk white hair flowing behind him in contrast
to the moody darkness around him.
As he came to the last deck but one, he felt a gentle touch
on his shoulder and looking in that direction saw, with heart-
170 Michael Moorcock
lurching horror, that one of Pyaray's blood-red tentacles had
found him. He stumbled back, pulling up his shield.
The tentacle tip touched the shield and rebounded suddenly,
the entire tentacle shrivelling. From above, where the
Chaos Lord*s main bulk was, there came a terrible screaming
and roaring.
"What's this? fVhafs this? Whafs this?"
Eiric shouted in impudent triumph at seeing his shield
work with such effect: " Tis Eiric of Melnibone, great lord.
Come to destroy thee!"
Another tentacle dropped towards him. seeking to curl
around the shield and seize him. Then another followed it
and another. Eiric hacked at one, severed its sensitive tip, saw
another touch the shield, recoil and shrivel and then avoided
the third in order to run round the deck and ascend, as
swiftly as he could, the ladder leading to the deck above.
Here be saw Jagreen Lem, his eyes wide. The Theocrat was
clad in his familiar scarlet armour. On his arm was his buckler
and in the same hand an axe, while his right hand held a
broadsword. He glanced down at these weapons, obviously
aware of their inadequacy against Eiric's.
"You later, Theocrat," Eiric promised grimly.
"You're a fool, Eiric! You're doomed now* whatever you
do!"
It was probably true, but he did not care.
"Aside, upstart," Eiric said as, his shield up, he moved
warily towards the many-teotacled Lord of Chaos.
"You are the killer of many cousins of mine, Eiric," the
creature said in a low voice. "And you've banished several
Dukes of Chaos to their own domain so that they cannot
reach Earth again. For that you must pay. But I at least do
not underestimate you, as, in likelihood, they did." A tentacle
reared above him and tried to come down from over the
shield's rim and seize his throat. He took a step backwards
and blocked the attempt with the shield.
Then a whole web of tentacles began to come from all
sides, each one curling around the shield, knowing its touch
to be death. He skipped aside, avoiding them with difficulty,
slicing about him with Stormbringer.
As he fought, he remembered Straasha's last message:
Strike for the crystal a-top his head. There is his life ami
his soul.
STORMBRINGER 171
J4 Eiric saw the blue radiating crystal which he had originally
^ taken to be one of Lord Pyaray's several eyes.
He moved in towards the roots of the tentacles, leaving his
back badly unprotected, but there was nothing else for it. As
he did so, a huge maw gaped in the thing's head and tentacles
began to draw him towards it He extended his shield
? towards the maw and had the satisfaction of seeing yellow
jelly-like stuff spurt from it as the Lord of Chaos screamed in
^ ?"*
^; He got his foot on one tentacle stump and clambered up
^ Che slippery hide of the Chaos Lord, every time his shield
^ touched him creating some sort of wound so that Lord
^ Pyaray began to thresh about dreadfully. Then he stood
V above the glowing soul-crystal. For an instant he paused, then
^ plunged Stormbringer point-first into the crystal!
There came a mighty throbbing from the heart of the entity's
body. It gave vent to a monstrous shriek sad then Eiric
yelled as Stormbringer took the soul of a Lord of Hell and
channelled this surging vitality through to him. It was too
much. He was hurled backwards.
. He lost his footing on the slippery back, stumbled off the
deck itself and fell to another nearly a hundred feet below.
He landed with bone-cracking force, but, thanks to the stolen
vitality, was completely unharmed. He got up, ready to clamber
towards Jagreen Lem.
' The Theocrat*s anxious face peered down at him and he
yelted: "You'll find a present for you in yonder cabin, Eiric!"
Tom between pursuing the Theocrat and investigating the
Cabin, Eiric turned and opened die door. From inside came a
dreadful sobbing.
"Zaroriniat" he cried. He ducked into the dark place and
(here he saw her.
Her lovely body was dreadfully changed so that it now
resembled the body of a white worm. Only her head, the
same beautiful head, was left.
Horrified he almost dropped his shield.
**Did Jagreen Lem do this?"
**He and his ally." The head nodded.
Sickened, Eiric could hardly bear to look at her. "Another
great score that must be paid," he muttered.
And then the worm-body had threshed and impaled itself
on his sword. "There!" the head cried. 'Take my soul into
172 Michael Moorcock
you. Eiric. for I am useless to myself and you, nowl Cany my
soul with yours and we shall be forever together."
He tried to withdraw the thirsty runeMade, but it was impossible.
And. unlike any other sensation he had ever received
from it, this was almost gentle, warm and pleasant, his
wife's soul flowed into his and be wept as it did so.
"Oh. Zarozinia,** he sobbed. **0h. my loveF
So she died, her soul blending with his as, years before, the
soul of his first love, Cymoril. had been taken. He did not
look at the dreadful worm-body, did not glance at her face,
but walked slowly from the cabin.
But now it appeared that the deck was disintegrating, flowing
apart Jagreen Lena had evidently made good his escape
and Eiric in his present mood, did not feel ready to pursue
him. Sword and shield both aiding him in their ways, he leapt
from the ship to the pulsating ground and ran for the Nihrain
steed. *
Then, the tears still flowing down his white face, he rode,
leaving the Ships of Hell breaking apart behind him. At least
these would threaten the worid no more and a blow bad been
struck against Chaos. Now only the horde itself remained to
be dealt with-and the dealing would not be so easy.
He rejoined his friends in silence, said nothing to them and
led the way over the shaking earth towards Melnibone, island
of his ancestors, where the last stand against Chaos would be
made, the last battle fought and his destiny completed.
And in his mind as he rode, he seemed to hear Zarozima'a
youthful voice whispering comforting words as, still sobbing,
he galloped away from the camp of Chaos.
BOOK FOUR
Doomed Lord's Passing
|-For the mind of Man alone is free to explore the lofty
i' vastness of the cosmic infinite, to transcend ordinary conS
iciousness, to roam the secret corridors of the brain where
^\ past and future melt into one . . . And universe and individ-
^ ual are tinted, the one mirrored in the other, and each conI;
tains the other.
i -The Chronicle of the Black Sword
One
^ The dreaming city no longer dreamed in splendour. The tat-
: tend towers of Imrryr were blackened husks, tumbled rags
^ of masonry standing sharp and dark against a sullen sky.
| Once, EXric's vengeance had brought fire to the city, and the
fire had brought ruin.
Streaks of cloud, like sooty smoke, whispered across the
pulsing mm so that the shouting, red-stained waters beyond
Imrryr were soiled by shadow, and they seemed to become
quieter as if bushed by the black scan that rode across their
ominous turbulence.
Upon a confusion of fallen masonry, a man stood watching
the waves. A tall man* broad-shouldered, slender at
hip, a man with slanting brows, pointed, lobeless ears, high
cheekbones and crimson, moody eyes In a dead white ascetic
face. He was dressed in black, quilted doublet and heavy
cloak, both high-collared, emphasising the pallor of his albino
kin. The wind, erratic and warm, played with his cloak, fingered
it and passed mindlessly on to howl through the broken
towers.
Eiric heard the howling and his memory was filled by tho
sweet, the malicious and melancholy melodies of old Melnibone.
He remembered, too, the other music his ancestors had
created when they had elegantly tortured their slaves, choosing
them for the pitch of their screams and forming them
into die instruments of unholy symphonies. Lost in this
nostalgia for a while, he found something dose to forgetfulness
and he wished that he had never doubted Ae code of
Melnibone, wished that he had accepted it without question
and thus left his mind unaundered. Bitterly, be smiled.
? A figure appeared below him and climbed the tumbled
tones to stand by his side. He was a small, red-haired man
with a wide mouth and eyes that bad once been bright and
amused.
175
176 Michael Moorcock
"You look to the Bast, Eiric." Moonglum murmured. **Yoa
look back towards something irremediable.**
Eiric put his long-fingered hand on his friend*s shoulder.
"Where else is there to look, Moonglum, when me worid lies
beneath the heel of Chaos? What would you have me do?
Look forward to days of hope and laughter, to an old age
lived in peace, with chadren playing around my feet?" He
laughed softly. It was not a laugh that Moonglum liked to
hear.
"Sepiriz spoke of help from the White Lords. It must come
soon. We must wait patiently." Moonglum turned to squint
into the glowering and motionless sun and then, his face set
in an introspective look, cast bis eyes down to the rubble on
which he stood.
Eiric was silent for a moment, watching the waves. Then
be shrugged. **Why complain? It does me no good. I cannot
act on my own volition. Whatever fate is before me cannot
be changed. I pray that the men who follow us win make use
of their ability to control their own destinies. I have no such
ability." He touched his jaw bone with his fingers and then
looked at the hand, noting nails, knuckles, muscles and veins
standing out on the pale skin. He ran this hand through the
silky strands of his white hair, drew a long breath and let it
out in a sigh. "Logic! The worid cries for logic. I have none.
yet here I am, formed as a man with mind, heart and vitals,
yet formed by a chance coming together of certain elements.
The worid needs logic. Yet all the logic in the worid is worm
as much as one lucky guess. Men take pains to weave a web
of careful thoughts-yet others thoughtlessly weave a random
pattern and achieve the same result. So much for the
thoughts of the sage."
"Ah,** Moonglum winked with attempted levity, **thus
speaks the wild adventurer, the cynic. But we are not all wud
and cynical, Eiric. Other men tread other paths-and reach
other conclusions than yours."
"I tread one that*s prc-ordained. Come, lets to the Dragon
Caves and see what Dyvim Slorm has done to rouse our reptilian
friends."
They stumbled together down the ruins and walked the
shattered canyons that had once been the lovely streets of
Imrryr. out of the city and along a grassy track mat wound
through the gorse, disturbing a flock of large ravens that fled
into the air, cawing, aD save one, the king, who balanced
STORMBRINGER 177
. 
l|
himself on a bush, his cloak of ruffled feathers drawn up in
dignity, bis black eyes regarding them with wary contempt.
Down through sharp rocks to the gaping entrance of the
Dragon Caves, down me steep steps into torch-Ht darkness
with its damp warmth and smell of scaly reptilian bodies.
Into the first cave where the great recumbent forms of the
sleeping dragons lay, their folded leathery wings rising into
the shadows, their green and black scales glowing faintly,
their clawed feet folded and their slender snouts curied back,
even in sleep, to display the long, ivory teeth that seemed like
so many white stalactites. Their dilating red nostrils groaned
in torpid slumber. The smell of their hides and their breath
was unmistakable, rousing in Moonglum some memory inherited
from his ancestors, some shadowy impression of a time
when these dragons and their masters swept across a world
they ruled, their inflammable venom dripping from their
fangs and heedlessly setting fire to the countryside across
which they flew. Eiric, used to it, hardly noticed the smell,
but passed on through the first cave and the second until he
found Dyvim Slorm, striding about with a torch in one hand
and a scroll in the other, swearing to himself.
He looked up as be heard their booted feet approach. He
spread out his arms and shouted, his voice echoing through
the caverns, "Nothing! Not a stir, not an eyelid flickering!
There is no way of rousing them. They'll not wake until they
have slept their necessary number of years. Oh, that we had
not used them on the last two occasions, for we have greater
need of them today!"
"Neither you nor I had the knowledge we have now. Regret
is useless since it can achieve nothing." Eiric stared
around him at the huge, shadowy forms. Here, slightly apart
from the rest, lay the leader-dragon, one he recognised and
felt affection for: Flamefang, the eldest, who was five thousand
years old and still young for a dragon. But Flamefang,
like the rest, slept on.
He went up to the beast and stroked its metal-like scales,
ran his hand down the ivory smoothness of its great front
fangs, felt its warm breath on his body and smiled. Beside
him, on his hip, be heard Stormbrmger murmur. He patted
the blade. "Here's one soul you cannot have. The dragons are
indestructible. They will survive, even though all the world
collapses into nothing.**
Dyvim Slorm said from another part of tile cavern: "I
178 Michael Moorcock
can't think of further action to take for the meantime, Brie.
Let's go back to the tower of D'a'iputna and refresh ourselves."
Eiric nodded assent and, together, the three men returned
through the caverns and ascended the steps into die sunlight.
"So," Dyvim Slorm remarked, "still no nightfall- The sun
has remained in that position for thirteen days, ever since we
left the Camp of Chaos and made our perilous way to Melnibone.
How much power must Chaos wield if it can top the
sun in its course?*
"Chaos might not have done this for all we know,** Moonglum
pointed out Though it's likely, of course, that if did.
Time has stopped. Time waits- But waits for what? More
confusion, further disorder? Or (he influence of me great balance
which will restore order and take vengeance against
those forces who have gone against its will? Or does Time
wait for us-three mortal men adrift,_cut off from what is
happening to all other men, waiting on Time as it waits on
us?-
"Perhaps the sun waits on us," Brie agreed. Tor is ft not
our destiny to prepare the worid for its fresh course? It
makes me feel a Uttle more man a mere pawn if that's the
case. What if we do nothing? Will the sun remain where it is
forever?"
They paused in their progress for a moment and stood
staring up at me pulsating red disc which flooded the streets
with scarlet light, at the black clouds which fled across the
sky before it. Where were the clouds going? Where did they
come from? They seemed instilled with purpose. It was possible
that they were not even clouds at all, but spirits of
Chaos bent on dark errands.
Eiric grunted to himself, aware of the uselessness of such
speculation. He led the way back to the tower of D*a*rputaa
where years before he had sought his love, his cousin
Cymorfl, and later lost her to the ravening thirst of the blade
by his side.
The tower had survived the flames, though the colours that
had once adorned it were blackened by fire. Here he left his
friends and went to his own room to fling himself, fully clad*
upon the soft Melnibonean bed and, almost immediately, fall
asleep.
Two
Eiric slept and Eiric dreamed and, though he was aware of
the unreality of his visions, Ilis attempts to rouse himself to
wakefuloess were entirely futile. Soon he ceased trying and
merely let his dream form itself and draw him into its bright
landscapes...
He saw Imrryr as it fwd been many centuries ago. Imrryr,
the same city he had known before he led the raid on it and
caused its destruction. The same, yet with a different, brighter
appearance as if it were newly-built. As well, the colours of
the surrounding countryside were richer, the sun darker
orange, the sky deep blue and sultry. Since then, he realised,
the very tints of the world had faded with the planet's
ageing...
People and beasts moved in the shining streets; tall,
eldritch Melniboneans, men and women walking with grace.
like proud tigers; hard-faced slaves with hopeless, stoic eyes,
long-legged horses of a type now extinct, small mastodons
drawing gaudy cars. Clearly on the breeze came the mysterious
scents of the place, the muted sounds of activity-all
hushed, for the Melniboneans hated noise as much as they
loved harmony. Heavy silk banners flapped from the scintillating
towers of Milestone, jade, ivory, crystal and polished
red granite. And Eiric moved in his sleep and ached to be
there amongst his own ancestors, the golden folk who had
dominated the old world.
Monstrous galleys passed through the water-maze which
led to Imrryr's inner harbour, bringing the best of the world's
booty, tax gathered from all parts of the Bright Empire, And
across the azure sky lazy dragons flapped their way towards
the caves where thousands of the beasts were stabled, unlike
the present where scarcely a hundred remained. In the tallest
tower-the Tower of B'aU'nezbett, the Tower of Kings-his
ancestors had studied sorcerous lore, conducted their mali-
179
180 Michael Moorcock
cious experiments, indulged their sensuous appetites-not decadently
as men of the Young Kingdoms might behave, but
according to their native instincts.
Eiric knew that he looked upon the ghost of a now-dead
city. And he seemed to pass beyond the Tower's gleaming
walls and see his emperor-ancestors indulging in drug-sharpened
conversation, lazily sadistic, sporting with demonwomen,
torturing, investigating the peculiar metabolism and
psychology of the enslaved races, delving into mystic lore, absorbing
a knowledge which few men of the later period could
experience without falling insane.
But it was clear that his must either be ft dream or vision
of a nether world which the dead of all ages inhabited, for
here were emperors of many different generations. Erie knew
them from their portraits: Black-ringletted Rondar IV,
twelfth emperor; sharp-eyed, imperious Eiric I, eightieth emperor;
horror burdened Kahan Vn, three-hundred-ftndtwenty-ninth
emperor. A dozen or more of me mightiest and
wisest of his four-hundred-aad-twcnty-seven ancestors, including
Terhali, the Green Empress, who had ruled the Bright
Empire from me year 8406 after its foundation until 9011.
Her longevity and green-tinged skin and hair had marked her
out. She bad been a powerful sorceress, even by Memibonean
standards. She was also reputed the daughter of a union between
Emperor luntric X and a demon.
Eiric. who saw all these as if from a darkened corner of
the great main chamber, observed the shimmering door of
black crystal open and a newcomer enter. He started and
again attempted to wake himself, without success. The man
was his father, Sadric the eighty-sixth, a tall man with heavylidded
eyes and a misery in him. He passed through the
throng as if it did not exist He walked directly towards Eiric
and stopped two paces from him. He stood looking at him.
the eyes peering upwards from beneath the heavy lids and
prominent brow. He was a gaunt-faced man who had been
disappointed in his albino son. He had a sharp, long nose,
sweeping cheekbones and a slight stoop because of his unusual
height He fingered the thin. red velvet of his robe with
his delicate, beringed hands. Then he spoke in a clear whisper
which, Eiric remembered, it bad always been his habit
to employ.
"My son. are you, too dead? I thought I*d been here but a
fleeting moment and yet I see you changed in years and with
STORMBRINGER 181
a burden on you that time and fate have placed there. How
did you die? In reckless combat on some upstart's foreign
blade? Or in this very tower in your ivory bed? And what of
Imrryr now? Does she fare well or ill, dreaming in her decline
of past splendour? The line continues, as it must-I will
not ask you if that part of your trust was kept A son, of
course, born of Cymoril whom you loved, for which your
cousin Yyrkoon hated you.**
"Father--
The old man raised a hand that was almost transparent
with age. "There is another question I must ask of you. One
that has troubled all who spend their immortality in this
shade of a city. Some of us have noticed that the city itself
fades at times and its colours dim, quivering as if about to
vanish. Companions of ours have passed even beyond death
and, perhaps, I shudder to contemplate it. into non-existence.
Even here, in the timeless region of death, unprecedented
changes manifest themselves and, those of us who've dared
ask the question and also give its answer, fear that some tumultuous
event has taken place in the world of the living.
Some event which, so great is it, that even here we are at*
fected and our souls' extinction threatened. A legend says
that until the Dreaming City dies, we ghosts may inhabit its
earlier glory. Is that the news you bear to us? Is this your
message? For I note on clearer observation that your body
lives still and mis is merely your astral body, released for a
while to wander the realms of the dead."
"Father-** but already the vision was fading; already he
was withdrawing back down the bellowing corridors of the
cosmos, through planes of existence unknown to living men,
away, away...
"Father!" he called, and his own voice echoed, but there
was none there to make reply. And in some sense at least he
was glad, for how could he answer the poor spirit and reveal
to him the truth of his guesses, admit the crimes he himself
was guilty of against his ancestral city, against the very blood
of his forefathers? All was mist and groaning sorrow as his
echoes boomed into his ears, seeming to take on their own independence
and warp the word into weirder words: "F-a-aa-ath-e-er-r-r
. . . A-a-a-a-a-v-a-a-a . .. A-a-a-a-ah-a-a-a-a ...
R-a-a-a . . . D-a-ra-va-ar-a-a . . . !"
Still, though he strove with all his being, be could not
rouse himself from slumber, but felt his spirit drawn through
182 Michael Moorcock
other regions of smoky indeterminacy, through patterns of
colour beyond bis earthly spectrum, beyond his mind's
conception.
A huge face began to take form in the mist
. "Sepiriz!" Eiric recognised the face of his mentor. But die
black Nihrainian, disembodied, did not appear to hear him.
*'Sepiriz-are you dead?"
The face faded, then reappeared almost at once upon die
rest of the man's tall frame.
"Eiric. I have discovered you at last, robed in your astral
body, I see. Thank Fate, for I thought I bad failed to summon
you. Now we must make haste. A breach has been made
in the defences of Chaos and we go to confer with the Lords
of Law!"
"Where are we?"
"Nowhere as yet We travel to the Higher Worlds. Come*
hurry, ni be your guide."
Down, down, through pits of softest wool mat engulfed
and comforted; through canyons that were cut between blazing
mountains of light which utterly dwarfed them, through
caverns of infinite blackness wherein their bodies shone and
Eiric knew that the dark nothingness went away in all direc-
tions for ever.
And then they seemed to stand upon a horizonkss plateau,
perfectly flat with occasional green and blue geometric constructions
rising from ft. The iridescent air was alive with
shimmering patterns of energy, weaving intricate shapes that
seemed very formal. And there, too, were things in human
form-things which had assumed such shape for the benefit
of the men who now encountered them.
The White Lords of the Higher Worlds, enemies of Chaos,
were marvellously beautiful, with bodies of such symmetry
that they could not be earthly. On)y Law could create such
perfection and, Eiric thought, such perfection defeated
progress. That the twin forces complemented one another was
now plainer than ever before, and for either to gain complete
ascendancy over the other meant entropy or stagnation for
the cosmos. Even though Law might dominate the earth,
Chaos must be present, and vice versa,
The Lords of Law were accoutred for war. They had made
this apparent in their choice of earth-like garb. Fine metals
and silks-or their like on this plane-gleamed on their perfect
bodies. Slender weapons were at their sides and their
STORMBRINGER 183
overpoweringly beautiful faces seemed to glow with purpose.
The tallest stepped forward.
"So, Sepiriz, you have brought the one whose destiny it is
to aid us. Greetings. Eiric of Melnibone. Though spawn of
Chaos you be, we have cause to welcome you. Do you
recognise me? The one whom your earthly mythology calls
Donblas the Justice Maker."
Immobile, Eiric said: "I remember you. Lord Donblas.
You are misnamed, I fear, for justice is nowhere present in
the world."
"You speak of your realm as if it were all realms.**
Donblas smiled without rancour, though it appeared that he
was unused to such impudence from a mortal. Eiric remained
insouciant His ancestors had been opposed to Donblas and
all his brethren, and it was still hard to consider the White
Lord an ally. "I see now how you have managed to defy our
opponents," Lord Donblas continued with approval. "And I
grant you that justice cannot be found on earth at this time.
But I am named the Justice Maker and have still the will to
make it when conditions change on your plane."
Eiric did not look directly at Donblas, for the sight of his
beauty was disturbing. "Then let's to work, my lord, and
change the world as soon we may. Let's bring the novelty of
justice to our sobbing realm."
"Haste, mortal, is impossible herel" It was another White
Lord speaking, his pale yellow surcoat rippling over the clear
steel of breastplate and greaves, the single Arrow of Law emblazoned
on it
"I'd thought the breach to earth made," Eiric frowned. "Td
thought this martial sight a sign that you prepared war
against Chaos!"
"War is prepared-but not possible until the summons
comes from your realm."
"From usi Has not Earth screamed for your aid? Have we
not worked sorceries and incantations to bring you to us?
What further summons do you need?"
"The ordained one," said Lord Donblas firmly.
"The ordained one? Godsl (You'll pardon roe, my lords.)
Is further work required of me, then?"
"One last great task, Eiric," said Sepiriz softly. "As I have
told you. Chaos blocks the attempts of the White Lords to
gain access to our world. The Horn of Fate must be blown
thrice before this business is fully terminated. The first blast
184 Michael Moorcock
will wake the Dragons of Inarryr, the second will allow the
White Lords entrance to the earthly plane, the third-" be
paused.
"Yes, the tnird?" Eiric was impatient
"The third will herald the death of our woridi"
"Where lies this mighty hom?"
"In one of several realms," said Scpinz. "A device of this
kind cannot be made on our plane, therefore it has had to be
constructed on a plane where logic rules over sorcery.'You
must journey there to locate the Horn of Fate.**
"And how can I accomplish such a journey?"
Once again Lord Donblas spoke Icvclly. "We will give you
the means. Equip yourself with sword and shield of Chaos.
for they will be of some use to you, though not so powerful
as in your world. Go you then to the highest point on the
ruined Tower of B'all'nezbett in Imrryr and step off into space.
You will not fall-unless what little power we retain on earth
fails us."
"Comforting words, my Lord Donblas. Very weu. I shall
do as you decree, to satisfy my own curiosity if nauofht else."
Donblas shrugged. "This is only one of many worlds-almost
as much a shadow as your own-but you may not approve
of it You will notice its sharpness, its clearness of
outline-that will indicate (hat Time has exerted no real influence
upon it that its structure has not been mellowed by
many events. However, let me wish you safe passage, mortal,
for I like you-and I have cause to thank you, too. Though
you be of Chaos, you have within you several of the qualities
we of Law admire. Go now-return to your mortal body and
prepare yourself for the venture ahead of you.**
Eiric bowed again and glanced at Sepiriz. The black
Nihrainian stepped back three paces and disappeared into the
gleaming air. Eiric followed him.
Once again their astral bodies ranged the myriad planes of
the supernatural universe, experiencing sensations unfamiliar
to the physical mind, before, quite without warning, Eiric felt
suddenly heavy and opened his eyes to discover that he was
in his own bed in the tower of D'a'rputna. Through the faint
light filtering between chinks in the heavy curtain thrown
over the window-slit, he saw the round Chaos Shield, its
eight-arrowed symbol pulsing slowly as if in concert with the
sun. and beside it his unholy runeblade Stormbringer, lying
STORMBRINGER 185
against die wall as if already prepared for their journey into
the might-be worid of a possible future.
Then Eiric slept again, more naturally, and was tormented,
also, by more natural nightmares so that at last he screamed
in his sleep and woke himself to find Moonglum standing by
die bed. There was an expression of sad concern upon his
narrow face. "What is it, Eiric? What ails your slumber?"
He shuddered. "Nothing. Leave me, Moonglum. and 111
join you when I rise."
'There must be reason for such shouting. Some prophetic
dream, perhaps?"
"Aye. prophetic sure enough. I thought I saw a vision of
my thin blood split by a hand that was my own. What import
has this dream, what moment? Answer that, my friend, and,
if you can't then leave me to my morbid bed until these
thoughts are gone."
"Come, rouse yourself. Eiric. Find forgctfulnesa in action.
The candle of the fourteenth day burns low and Dyvim
Slorm awaits your good advice."
The albino pulled himself upright and swung his trembling
legs over the bed. He felt enfeebled, bereft of energy. Moonglum
helped him rise. "Throw off this troubled mood and
help us in our quandary," he said with a hollow levity that
made his fears more plain.
"Aye," Eiric straightened himself. "Hand me my sword. I
need its stolen strength."
Unwillingly. Moonglum went to the wall where stood the
evil weapon, took the runeblade by its scabbard and lifted it
with difficulty, for it was an over-heavy sword. He shuddered
as it seemed to titter faintly at him. and he presented it hiltfirst
to his friend. Gratefully, Eiric seized if was about to pull
it from the sheath when he paused. "Best leave the room before
I free the blade."
Moonglum understood at once and left, not anxious to
trust his life to the whim of the hell-sword-or his friend.
When he was gone, Hric unsheathed the great sword and
at once felt a faint tingle as its supernatural vitality began to
stream into his nerves. Yet it was scarcely adequate and he
knew that if the blade did not feed soon upon the life-stuff of
another it would seek the souls of his two remaining friends.
He replaced it thoughtfully in the scabbard, buckled it
around his waist and strode to join Moonglum in the highceilmged
corridor.
186 Michael Moorcock
In silence, they proceeded down the twisting marble steps
of the tower, until they reached the centre level where the
main chamber was. Here, Dyvim Slorm was seated, a bottle
of old Melnibonean wine on the table before him, a large silver
bowl in his bands. His sword Mournblade was on the
table beside the bottle. They had found the store of wine in
the secret cellars of the place, missed by the sea-reavers
whom Eiric had led upon bnrryr when he and his cousin had
fought on opposite sides. The bowl was full of the congealed
mixture of herbs, honey and barley which their ancestors had
used to sustain themselves in times of need. Dyvim Slorm
was brooding over it, but looked up when they came close
and sat themselves on chairs opposite him. He smiled
hopelessly.
"I fear, Eiric. that I have done all I can to rouse our sleeping
friends. No more is possible-and they still slumber."
Eiric remembered the details of his vision and, half-afraid
that it had been merely a figment of his own imaginings, supplying
the fantasy of hope where, in reality, DO hope was,
said: "Forget the dragons, for a while at least Last night I
left my body, so I thought, and journeyed to places beyond
the earth, eventually to the White Lords' plane where they
told me how I might rouse the dragons by blowing upon a
horn. 1 intend to follow their directions and seek that horn."
Dyvim Slorm replaced his bowl upon the table. "We'll
accompany you, of course."
"No need-and anyway impossible-I'll have to go alone.
Wait for me until I return and if I do not-well, you must do
what you decide, spending your remaining years imprisoned
on this isle, or going to battle with Chaos."
"I have the idea that time has stopped in truth and if we
stay here we shall live on forever and shall be forced to face
the resulting boredom," Moonglum put in. "If you don't return,
I for one will ride into the conquered realms to take a
few of our enemies with me to limbo."
"As you will," Eiric said- "But wait for me until all your
patience is ended, for I know not how long III be."
He stood up and they seemed a trifle startled, as if they
had not until then understood the import of his words.
"Fare you well, then, my friend," said Moonglum.
"How well I fare depends on what I meet where I go," Eiric
smiled. "But thanks, Moonglum. Fare you well, good
cousin, do not fret Perhaps well wake the dragons yett"
STORMBRINGER 187
"Aye," Dyvim Slorm said with a sudden resurgence of vi-
tality, "We shall, we shall! And their fiery venom will spread
across the filth mat Chaos brings, burning it dean! That day
must come or I'm no prophet at all!**
Infected by this uneJtpected enthusiasm, Eiric felt an increase
of confidence, saluted his friends, smiled, and walked
upright from the chamber, ascending the marble stairs to take
the Chaos Shield from its place and go down to the gateway
of the tower and pass through it, walking the jagged streets
towards die magic-sundered ruin that had once been the
scene of his dreadful vengeance and unwitting murder-the
Tower of B'all'nezbett.
Three
Now, as Eiric stood before the broken entrance of the tower.
his mind was beset with bursting thoughts which fled about
his skull, made overtures to his convictions and threatened to
send him hopelessly back to rejoin his companions. But he
fought them, forced them down, forgot them, clung to his
remembrance of the White Lord's assurance and passed into
the shadowed shell which still had the smell of burnt wood
and fabric about its blackened interior.
This tower, which had formed a funeral pyre for the murdered
corpse of his first love Cymoril and his warped cousin.
her brother Yyrkoon. had been gutted of innards. Only the
stone stairway remained and that, he noted, peering into the
gloom through which rays of sunlight slanted, bad collapsed
before it reached the roof. '
He dare not think, for thought might rob him of action.
Instead, he placed a foot upon the first stair and began to
climb. As be did so, a faint sound entered his ears, or it may
have been that it came from within bis mind. However it
reached his consciousness, it sounded like a far-away orchestra
tuning itself. As he climbed higher* the sound mounted,
rhythmic yet discordant, until, by the time he reached the final
step still left intact, it thundered through his skull, pounded
through his body producing a sensation of dull pain.
He paused and stared downward to the tower's floor far
below. Fears beset him. He wondered whether Lord Donblas
had intended him to climb to the highest point he could easily
reach, or the actual point which was still some twenty feet
above him. He decided it was best to take the White Lord
literally and swinging the great Chaos Shield upon his back,
reached above him and got bis fingers into a crack in the
wall, which now sloped gently inwards. He heaved himself
up, his legs dangling and his feet seeking a bold. He had always
been troubled by heights and disliked the sensation that
188
STORMBRINGER 189
came to him as be glanced down to the nibble-laden floor,
eighty feet below, but he continued to climb and the climbing
was made easier by me fissures in the tower's wall. Though
he expected to fall, he did not, and at last reached me unsafe
roof, easing himself through a bole and on to the sloping exterior.
Bit by bit he climbed until he was on the highest part
of the tower. Then, fearing hesitation till, he stepped outwards,
over the festering streets of Imrryr far below.
The discordant music topped. A roaring note replaced ft.
Swirling waves of red and black rushed towards him and men
he had burst through them to find he was standing on firm
turf beneath a small, pale sun, me smell of grass in his nostrils.
He noted mat, whereas me ancient world seen in his
dream had seemed more colourful than his own, mis world,
in turn, contained even less colour, though it seemed to be
cleaner in its outlines, in sharper focus. And the breeze mat
blew against his face was.colder. He began to walk over me
grass towards a thick forest of low, solid foliage which lay
ahead. He reached me perimeter of me forest but did not enter,
circumnavigating it until he came to a stream mat went
off into the distance, away from the forest
He noticed with curiosity mat me bright clear water appeared
not to move. It was frozen, though not by any natural
process that he recognised. It bad all the attributes of a summer
stream-yet it did not flow. Feeling mat this phenomenon
contrasted strangely with me rest of the scenery, he
swung me round Chaos Shield on to his arm, drew his throbbing
sword and began to follow the stream.
The grass gave way to gorse and rocks with me occasional
dump of waving ferns of a variety he didn't recognise.
Ahead, he thought he heard the tinkle of water, but here the
stream was still frozen. As he passed a rock taller man the
rest, he heard a voice above him.
"Eiric!"
He looked up.
There, on the rock, stood a young dwarf with a long,
brown beard that reached below his waist He clutched a
spear, his only weapon, and he was dad m russet breeks and
jerkin with a green cap on his head and no shoes on his
broad, naked feel He bad eyes like quartz that were at once
hard, harsh and humorous.
"That's my name," Eiric said quizzically. "Yet how is it
you know me?**
Michael Moorcock
190
"I am not of this world myself-at least, not exactly. I
have no existence in time as you know it, but move here and
there in the shadow worlds that the gods make. It is my
nature to do so. In return for allowing me to exist, the gods
sometimes use me as a messenger. My name is Jermays the
Crooked, as unfinished as these worlds themselves." He clambered
down the rode and stood looking up at Eiric.
"What's your purpose here?" asked the albino.
"Methought you sought the Horn of Fate?"
"True. Know you where it lies?"
"Aye," smiled the young dwarf sardonically. "Ifs buried
with the still-living corpse of a hero of this realm-a warrior
they call Roland. Possibly yet another incarnation of the
champion Eternal.**
"An outlandish name."
*'No more than yours to other ears. Roland, save that his
life was not so doom beset, is your counterpart in his own
realm. He met his death in a valley not far from here,
trapped and betrayed by a fellow warrior. The horn was with
him then and he blew it once before he died. Some say that
the echoes still resound through the valley, and will resound
forever, though Roland perished many years ago. The horn's
full purpose is unknown here-and was unknown even to Roland.
It is called Olifant and, with his magic sword Durandana,
was buried with him in the monstrous grave mound that
you see yonder."
The dwarf pointed into the distance and Biric saw mat be
indicated something be had earlier taken to be a large hillock.
"And what must I do to gain this hom?" he asked.
The dwarf grinned with a hint of malice in his voice, ^ou
must match that bodkin there 'gainst Roland's Durandana.
His was consecrated by the Forces of Light whereas yours
was forged by the Forces of Darkness. It should be an interesting
conflict"
"You say he's dead-then how can he fight me?**
"He wears the horn by a thong about his neck. If you attempt
to remove it. he will defend his ownership, waking
from the deathless sleep that seems to be the lot of most
heroes in this world."
Eiric smiled. "It seems to me they must be short of heroes
if they have to preserve them in that manner.**
"Perhaps," the dwarf answered carelessly, "for there are a
dozen or more who lie sleeping somewhere in this land alone.
CTORMB RINGER 191
They are nipposcd to awaken only when a desperate need
arises, yet I've known unpleasant things to happen and still
they have alept It could be they await the end of their world,
which die gods may destroy if It proves unsuitable, in which
case they will fight to prevent such a happening. It is merely
a poorly conceived theory of my own and of little weight
Perhaps the legends arise from some dim knowledge of the
fate of the Champion EEteroaL
The dwarf bobbed a cynical bow and, hefting his spear,
sahited Eiric. "Farewell, Eiric of Melnibone. When you wish
to return I will be here to lead you-and return you must,
whether alive or dead, for, as you are probably aware, your
very presence, your physical appearance itself, contradicts
this environment. Only one thing fits here..."
"What's Aatr
"Your sword.'*
"My wordi Strange, I should haw thought that would be
the last thing.'* He shook a growing idea out of his mind. He
did not have time to speculate. "I've no liking to be here," he
commented as the dwarf clambered over the rocks. He
glanced in the direction of toe great burial mound and began
to advance towards ft. Beside him he saw that the stream was
moving naturally and he had the impression that though Law
influenced this world, it was to some extent still forced to
deal with the disrupting influence of Chaos.
The grave barrow, be could now see, was fenced about
with giant slabs of unadorned stone. Beyond the stones were
olive trees that had dull jewels hanging from tncir branches,
and beyond them, through tee leafy apertures, Eiric saw a
tall, curved entrance blocked by gates of brass embossed with
gold.
Though strong, Stormbringer," he said to his sword, "I
wonder if youll be strong enough to war in this world as well
as giving my body vitality. Let's test you."
He advanced to the gate and drawing back his arm delivered
a mighty blow upon it with the runesword. The metal
rang and a dent appeared. Again he struck, this time holding
the sword with both hands, but then a voice cried from his
right
"What demon would disturb dead Roland's rest?"
"Who speaks the language of Melnibone?" Eiric retorted
boldly.
"I speak the language of demons, for I perceive that is
192 Michael Moorcock
what you are. I know of oo Mulnebooney and am wen-versed
in the ancient mysteries."
"A proud boast for a woman." said Eiric. who had not yet
seen the speaker. She emerged, then, from around the barrow,
and stood staring at him from out of her glowing green
eyes: She had a long, beautiful face and was almost as pale as
himself, though her hair was jet black. "What's your name?"
he asked. "And are you a native of this world?"
"I am named Vivian, an enchantress, but earthly enough.
Your Master knows the name of Vivian who once loved Roland,
though he was too upright to indulge her, for she is
immortal and a witch," She laughed good-humouredly.
"Therefore I am familiar with demons of your like and do
not fear you. Aroint thee! Aroint thee-or shall I call Bishop
Turpin to exorcise thee?"
"Some of your words," said EIric courteously, "are unfamiliar
and the speech of my folk much garbled. Are you
some guardian of this hero's tomb?"
"Self-made guardian, aye. Now gol" She pointed towards
the stone slabs.
"That is not possible. The corpse within has something of
value to roe. The Horn of Fate we call it, but you know it by
another name."
"Olifanti But that's a blessed instrument No demon would
dare touch it Even I..."
"I am no demon- Fm sufficiently human, I swear. Now
stand aside. This cursed door resists my efforts too well."
"Aye," she said thoughtfully. "You could be a manthough
an unlikely one. But the white face and hair, the red
eyes. the tongue you speak...."
"Sorcerer I be, but no demon. Please-stand aside." .
She looked carefully into his face and her look disturbed
him. He took her by her shoulder. She felt real enough,
yet somehow she had little real presence. It was as if she
were far away rather than close to him. They stared at one
another, both curious, both troubled. He whispered: "What
knowledge could you have of my language? Is this world a
dream of mine or of the gods? It seems scarcely tangible.
Why?"
She 'heard him. "Say you so of us? What of your ghostly
self? You seem an apparition from the dead past!"
"From the past! Aha-and you are of the future, as yet
unformed. Perhaps that brings us to a conclusion?"
STORMBRINGER 193
She did not pursue the topic but said suddenly: "Stranger,
you will never break this door down. If you can touch Olifant,
that speaks of you as mortal, despite your appearance.
You must need the horn for an important task."
Eiric smiled. "Aye-for if I do not take it back from
whence it came, you will never exist!"
She frowned. "Hints! Hints! I feel close to a discovery yet
cannot grasp why, and that's unusual for Vivian. Here-" she
took a big key from her gown aod offered it to him-"this is
the key to open Roland's tomb. It is the only one. I had to
kill to get it, but oftimes I venture into the gloom of his
grave to stare down at bis face and pine that I might revive
him and keep him living forever on my island home. Take
the born! Rouse him-and when he has slain you, he will
come to me and my warmth, my offer of everlasting life,
rafter than lie in that cold place again. Go-be slain by Roland!"
He took the key.
"Thanks, Lady Vivian. If it were possible to convince one
who in truth did not yet exist, I wouldlell you that Roland's
daying of me would be worse for you than if I am successful."
He put the large key in the lock and it turned easily. The
doors swung open and he saw that a long, low-roofed corridor
twisted before him. Unhesitatingly, he advanced down it
towards a flickering light that he could see through the cold
! and misty gloom. Yet, as he walked, it was as if he glided in
a dream less real than that he bad experienced the previous
night Now he entered the funeral chamber, illuminated by
tall candles surrounding the bier of a man who lay upon it
dressed in armour of a crude and unfamiliar design, a huge
broadsword, almost as large as Stonnbringer gripped to his
chest and, upon the, hilt, attached to his neck by a silver
chain-the Horn of Fate, Olifant!
The man's face, seen in the candlelight, was strange; old
and yet with a youthful appearance, the brow smooth and the
features unlined.
Eiric took Stonnbringer in his left hand and reached out
to grasp me horn. He made no attempt at caution, but
wrenched it off Roland's neck.
A great roar came from the hero's throat Immediately he
had raised himself to a sitting position, the sword shifting into
his two hands, his legs swinging off the bier. His eyes widened
194 Michael Moorcock
as he saw Eiric with the horn in bis bands, and he, Jumped at
the albino, the sword Duraodana whistling downwards
towards Eiric's head. He raised the shield and blocked the
blow, slipped the horn into his jerkin and, backing away, returned
Stormbringer to his right hand. Roland was now
shouting something in a language completely unfamiliar to
Eiric. He did not bother trying to understand, since tee angry
tones were sufficient to teD him the knight was not suggesting
a peaceful negotiation. He continued defending himself with'
out once carrying the offensive to Roland, backing inch by
inch down the long tunnel towards the barrow's mouth. Every
time Duraodana struck the Chaos Shield, both sword and
shield gave out wild notes of great intensity. Implacably the
hero continued to press Eiric backwards, his broadsword
whirling and striking the shield, sometimes me blade, with
fantastic etreogth. Then they had broken into daylight and
Roland seemed momentarily blinded. Eirie glimpsed Vivian
watching them eageriy for it appeared Roland was winning.
However, m daylight and with no chance of avoiding the
angered knight, Eiric retaliated with all me energy he had
been saving until mis moment. Shield high, sword swinging,
he now took the attack, surprising Roland who was evidently
unused to this behavior on the part of an opponent.
Stormbfinger mailed as it bit into Roland's poorly-forged armour
of iron, riveted with big unsightly nails, painted on the
front with a dull red cross mat was a scarcely adequate insignia
for so famous a hero. But there was no mistaking Durandana's
powers for, though seemingly as crudely forged as the
armour, it did not lose its edge and threatened to bite through
the Chaos Shield with every stroke. Eiric's left arm was numb
from me blows and his right arm ached. Lord Donblas bad
not lied to him when he had said that the strength of his
weapons would be diminished on this world.
Roland paused, shouting something, but Eiric did not heed
him, seized his opportunity and rushed in to crush his shield
against Roland's body. The knight reeled and staggered, his
word giving off a keening note. Eiric struck at a gap between
Roland's helmet and gorget The head sprang off the
shoulders and rolled grotesquely away, but no blood pumped
from the jugular. The eyes of the head remained open, staring
at Eiric.
Vivian screamed and shouted something in the same lanSTORMBRINGER
195
guage which Roland had used. Eiric stepped back; his face
grim.
"Oh, his legend, his legend F she cried. "The only hope the
people have is that Roland will some day ride once more to
their aid. Now you have slain him* Fiend!"
"Possessed I may be." he said quietly as she sobbed by the
headless corpse, "but I was ordained by the gods to do this
work. ni take my leave of your drab world, now."
"Have you no sorrow for the crime you've done?"
"None. madam, for this is only one of many such acts
which, Fm told, serve some greater purpose. That I some-
times doubt the truth of this consolation need not concern
you. Know you mis, though, I have been told that it is the
fate of such as your Roland and myself never to die-always
to be reborn. Farewell."
And he walked away from mere; passed through the olive
grove and the tall stones, the Horn of Fate cold against his
heart.
He followed the river towards the high rock where he saw
a small figure poised and, when be reached it, looked up at
[me young dwarf Jennays the Crooked, took the horn from
;,his jerkin and displayed h.
 Jennays chuckled. "So Roland is dead, and you, Eiric,
have left a fragment of a legend in this world, if it survives.
Well, shall I escort you back to your own place?"*
| "Aye, and hurry."
: Jermays skipped down me rocks and stood beside the tall
: albino. "Hmm," he mused, "that horn could prove trou-
| Mesome to us. Best replace it in your jerkin and keep it cov-
^cred by your shield."
Eiric obeyed the dwarf and followed him down to the
banks of the strangely frozen river. It looked as if it should
have been moving, but it evidently was not Jennays leapt
into it and, incredibly, began to sink. "Quickly! Follow!"
Eiric stepped in after him and for a moment stood on me
frozen water before he, also, began to sink.
Though the stream was shallow, they continued to sink until
all similarity to water was gone and they were passing
down into rich darkness that became warm and heavyscented.
Jennays pulled at his sleeve. "This way!" And they
shot off at right angles, darting from side to side, up and
down, through a maze that apparently only Jermays could
ace. Against his chest, the hom seemed to heave and he
196 Michael Moorcock
pressed his shield to it Then he blinked u he found himself
in the light again, staring at the great red sun throbbing in
the dark blue sky. His feet were on something olid. He
looked and uw that it was the Tower of B'all'nezbctL For a
while longer the horn heaved as if alive, like a trapped bird,
but, after some moments, it became quiescent'
Eiric lowered himself to the roof and began to edge down
it until he came to the gap through which he had passed earlier.
Then suddenly he looked up as he heard a noise in the sky.
There, his feet planted on air, stood grinning Jermays the
Crooked. 'TU be passing on, for I like not this worid at all.'*
He chuckled. "It has been a pleasure to have had a part in
this. Goodbye, Sir Champion. Remember me, the unfinished
one. to the Lords of the Higher World*-and perhaps you
could hint to them that the sooner they improve their
memories or else their creative powers, the sooner I shall be
happy."
Eiric said: "Peihaps you'd best be content with your lot.
Jermays. There are disadvantages to stability, too."
Jermays shrugged and vanished.
Slowly, all but spent, Eiric descended the fractured wafl
and, with great relief, reached the first stair to stumble down
the rest and run back to the tower of D'ar'putna with the
news of his success.
Four
The three thoughtful men left the city and went down to the
Dragon Caves. On a new silver chain, the Horn of Fate was
slung around Eiric'a neck. He was dressed in black leather.
with his head unprotected save for a golden circlet mat kept
his hair from his eyes. Stonnbringer scabbarded at his side,
the Chaos Shield on his back. he led his companions into the
grottoes, to come eventually to the slumbering bulk of Flamefang
the Dragon Leader. His lungs seemed to have insufficient
capacity as.he drew air into them and grasped me horn.
Then he glanced at his friends, who regarded him expectantly,
straddled his legs slightly and blew with all his
strength into the hom.
The note sounded, deep and sonorous, and as it reverberated
through the caverns, he felt all his vitality draining from
him. Weaker and weaker he became until he sank to hia
knees, the hom still at his lips, the note failing, his vision
dimming, his limbs shaking, and then he sprawled face down
on the rock, the hom clattering beside him.
Moonglum dashed towards him and gasped as he saw the
bulk of the leading dragon stir and one huge, unblinking eye,
as cold as the northern wastes, stare at him.
Dyvim Storm yelled jubilantly: "Flamefangi Brother Flam(r).
fang. you wake!"
All about him he saw the other dragons stirring also, shaking
their wings and straightening their slender necks, ruffling
their homy crests. Moonglum felt smaller than usual as the
dragons wakened. He began to feel nervous of me huge
beasts, wondering how they would respond to the presence of
one who was not a Dragon Master. Then he remembered the
enervated albino and knelt beside Eiric, touching his
leathern-covered shoulder.
"Eiric! D'you live?"
Eiric groaned and tried to turn over onto his back. Moon-
197
198 Michael Moorcock
glum helped him sit upright *Tm weak, Moonglum-ao weak
I can't rise. 'Die born took all my energy!**
"Draw your sword-it will supply what you need.**
Eiric shook his head. "I'll take your advice, though I doubt
whether you're right this time. That hero I slew must have
been soulless, or else his soul was well-protected, for I gained
nothing from him.**
His hand fumbled towards his hip and grasped
Stormbringer's hilt. With a tremendous effort, he drew it
from the scabbard and felt a faint flowing leave it and enter
aim, but not enough to allow him any great exertion. He got
up and staggered towards Flamefang. The monster recognised
him and nutted its wings by way of welcome, its hard,
solemn eyes seeming to warm slightly. As he moved round to
pat its neck, he staggered and fell to one knee, rising with effort.
In earlier times there had been slaves to saddle me dragons
but now they would have to saddle their beasts themselves.
They went to the saddle-store and chose the saddles they
Deeded, for each saddle was designed for an individual beast
BIric could scarcely bear the weight of Flamefang*s elaborately
carved saddle of wood, steel, jewels and precious
metals. He was forced to drag it across die cavern floor. Not
wishing to embarrass him with their glances, the other two ignored
bis impotent struggling and busied themselves with
their own saddles. The dragons must have understood that
Moonglum was a friend, for they did not demur when he
cautiously approached to dress his dragon with its high
wooden saddle with silver stirrups and sheathed, lance-like
goad from which was draped the pennant of a noble family
of Melnibone, now all dead.
When they had finished saddling their own beasts, they
went to help Eiric who was half-falling with weariness, his
back leaning against Flamefang's scaly body. While they tied
the girths, Dyvim Slorm said: "Will you have strength
enough to lead us?"
Eiric sighed. "Aye-enough, I think, for that But I know
111 have none for the ensuing battle. There must be some
means of gaining vitality."
"What of the herbs you once used?**
"Those I had have lost their properties, and there are no
fresh ones to be found now that Chaos has warped plant,
rock and ocean with its dreadful stamp."
STORMBRINGER 199
Leaving Moonglum to finish Flamefang's saddling, Dyvim
Slorm went away to return with a cup of liquid which he
hoped would help revivify Eiric. Eiric drank it, gave the cup
back to Dyvim Slorm and reached up to grasp the saddlepommel,
hauling himself into the high saddle. "Bring straps,"
he ordered.
"Straps?" Dyvim Slorm frowned.
"Aye. If I'm not secured in my saddle, Fll likely fan to the
ground before we've flown a mile.**
So be sat in the tall saddle and gripped the goad which
bore his blue, green and silver pennant, gripped it in hs
gauntleted hand and waited until they came with the straps
and bound him firmly into place. He gave a slight smile and
shook the dragon's halter. "Forward, Flamefang, lead the way
for your brothers and sisters."
With folded wings and lowered head, the dragon began to
walk its slithering way to the exit Behind it, on two dragons
almost as large, sat Dyvim Slorm and Moonghun, their faces
grimly concerned, watchful for Eiric'g safety. As Flamefang
moved with rolling gait through the series of caverns, its fellow
beasts fell in behind it until all of them had reached the
great mouth of the last cave which overlooked the threshing
sea. The sun was still in its position overhead, scarlet and
swollen, seeming to swell in rhythm with the movement of
the sea. Voicing a shout that was half-hiss, half-yell. Eiric
lapped at Flamefang's neck with his goad.
"Up, Flamefaogt Up for Melnibone and vengeanceF
As if sensing the strangeness of the world, Flamefang
paused on me brink of the ledge, shaking his head and snorting
to himself. Then, as he launched into the air, his wings
began to beat, their fantastic spread flapping with slow grace,
but bearing the beast along with marvellous speed.
Up, up, beneath die swollen sun, up into me hot, turbulent
air, up towards the East where Ac camps of hell were waiting.
And in Flamefang's wake came its two brother-dragons,
bearing Moonglum and Dyvim Slorm who had a horn of his
own, the one used to direct the dragons. Ninety-five other
dragons, males and females, darkened the deep blue sky, all
green, red and gold, scales clashing and flashing, wings
beating and, in concert, sounding like the throbbing of a million
drums as they flew over the unclean waters with gaping
jaws and cold, cold eyes.
Though beneath him now Eiric saw with blurring eyes
200 Michael Moorcock
many colours of immense richness, they were aH darfc and
changing constantly, shifting from one extreme of a dark,
spectrum to the other. It was not water down mere BOW-it
was a fluid comprised of materials born natural and supernatural,
real and abstract Pain* longing. misery and laughter
could be seen as tangible fragments of me tossing tide, passions
and frustrations lay in it also. as wcD as stuff made of
living flesh mat bubbled on occasions to the surface.
In his weakened condition, me sight of me fluid sickened
Eiric and he turned his red eyes upwards and towards the
East as the dragons moved swiftly on their course.
Soon they were flying across what bad once been the mainland
of me Eastern Continent, me major Vilmirian peninsula.
But now it was bereft of its earlier qualities and huge
columns of dark mist rose into the air so that they wen
forced to guide their reptilian steeds among them. Lava
streamed, bubbling, on the far-away ground, disgusting
shapes flitted over land and air, monstrous beasts and me occasional
group of weird riders on skeletal horses who looked
up when they heard the beat of the dragon wings and rode in
frantic fear towards their camps.
The worid seemed a dead corpse, given life In corruption
by virtue of the vermin which fed upon it
Of mankind nothing was left, save for the three mounted
on the dragons.
Eiric knew that Jagreen Lera and his human allies had
long-since forsaken their humanity and could no longer claim
kinship with the species their hordes had swept from the
worid. The leaders alone might retain their human shape, the
Dark Lords don it, but their souls were warped just as the
bodies of their followers had become warped into hell-shapes
due to the transmuting influence of Chao*. AH the dark powers
of Chaos lay upon the world, yet deeper and deeper into
its heart went the dragon flight, with Eiric swaying in his
saddle and only stopped from falling by the straps that bound
his body. From the lands below there seemed to rise an
aching shriek as tortured nature was defied and its components
forced into alien forms.
Onward they sped, towards what had once been Kariaak
by the Weeping Waste and which was now the Camp of
Chaos. Then, from above, they heard a cawing yell and saw
black shapes dropping down on them. Eiric had not even
strength to cry out, but weakly tapped Flamefang's neck and
STORMBRINGER 201
, ?.
: i
made the beast veer away from the danger. Moonglum and
Dyvim Slorm followed his example and Dyvim Slorm sounded
his born, ordering the dragons not to engage the attackers,
but some of the dragons in me rear were too late and were
forced to turn aod battle with the black phantoms.
Ehic looked behind him and, for a few seconds, saw them
outlined against the sky, rending things with the jaws of
whales, locked in combat with me dragons that shot their
flaming venom at them and tore at mem with teeth and
claws, wings flapping as they strove to hold their height, but
then another wave of dark green mist spread across his field
of vision and he did not see the fate that befell the dozen
dragons.
Now Eiric signalled Plamefang to fly low over a small
army of riders fleeing through the tormented land, the eightarrowed
standard of Chaos flapping from the leader's encrust-
ed lance. Down they went and loosed weir venom, having the
satisfaction of seeing the beasts and riders scream, bum and
perish, their ashes absorbed into the shifting ground.
Here and there, now, they saw a gigantic castle, newlyraised
by sorcerer, perhaps as a reward to some traitor king
who had aided Jagreen Lem, perhaps as the keeps of the
Captains of Chaos who, now that Chaos ruled, were establishing
themselves on earth. They swept down on them, released
their venom and left them burning with unnatural fires, the
gouting smoke blending with me shredding mist And at last
Eiric saw the Camp of Chaos-a city but recently made in
the same manner as the castles, the flaring sign of Chaos
hanging amber in the sky overhead. Yet he felt no elation,
only despair that he was so weak be would not have the
strength to meet his enemy Jagreen Lem in combat What
could he do? How could strength be found-for, even if he
took no part in the fighting, he must have sufficient vitality to
blow the horn a second time and summon the White Lords to
earth.
The city seemed peculiarly silent as if it waited or prepared
for something. It had an ominous atmosphere and Eiric, before
Flamefang crossed the perimeter, made his dragon steed
turn and circle.
Dyvim Slorm. and Moonglum and the rest of the dragon
flight followed his example and Dyvim Slorm called across
the air to him. "What now, Eiric? I had not expected a city
to be here so soon!"
202 Michael Moorcock
"Neither had L But look.-** he pointed with a trembling
band he could hardly lift. there's Jagreen Lern's Merman
standard. And there-" now he pointed to the left and right,
"the standards of a score of the Dukes of Hell! Yet I see no
other human standards." Moonglum shouted:
"Those castles we destroyed. I suspect that Jagreen Lern
had already divided up these sundered lands and given them
to his, hirelings. How can we tell how much time has really
passed-time in which an this could have been brought
about?"
T^uc," Brie nodded, looking up at the still sun. He
lurched forward in his saddle, half-swooning, pulled himself
upright, breathing heavily. The Chaos Shield seemed like a
huge weight on his arm, but be held it warily before him.
Then be acted on impulse and goaded Flamefang into
speed so that me dragon rushed towards me city, diving down
towards me castle of Jagreen Lem.
Nothing sought to stop him and he landed me beast among
me turrets of the castle. Silence was dominant He looked
around, puzzled, but could see nothing save the towering
buildings of dark stone that seemed to ooze beneath Flamefang's
feet
The straps stopped him from dismounting, but he saw
enough to be sure the city was deserted. Where was me horde
of heD? Where was Jagreen Lern?
Dyvim Storm and Moonglum came to Join him, while the
rest of the dragons circled above. Qaws scratched on rock,
wings slashed the air and they settled, turning their mighty
heads this way and that, ruffling their scales restlessly for,
once aroused from their dumber, me dragons preferred the
airtotbeland.
Dyvim Slorm stayed but long enough to mutter: "ni scout
the city," and then was flying away again, low amongst the
castles until they heard him cry out and saw him swoop out
of sight There came a yeu, but they could not see what
caused it, a pause, and then Dyvim Slorm's dragon was flapping
up again and they saw he had a writhing prisoner slung
over the front of his saddle. He landed. The thing he had
captured bore resemblance to a human being, but was misshapen
and ugly vim a jutting underiip, low forehead and no
chin; huge, square, uneven teeth bristled in its mouth and its
bare arms were covered in waving hairs.
"Where are your masters?*' Dyvim Slorm demanded. The
STORMBRINGER 203
thing seemed to possess no fear, but chuckled: *They
predicted your coming and. since the city limits movement.
have assembled their armies on a plateau they have made five
miles to the north-east" It turned its dilated eyes to Eiric.
"Jagreen Lern sent greetings and said he anticipated your
foolish downfall."
Eiric shrugged.
Dyvim Slorm drew his own runeblade and hacked the
creature down. It cackled as it died, for its sanity had fled
with its fear. He shivered as the thing's soul-stuff blended
with his own and passed extra energy to him. Then he cursed
and looked at Eiric with pain in his eyes.
"I acted in haste-I should have given him to you."
Eiric said nothing to mis but whispered in his failing voice:
"Let's to their battlefield. Hurry!"
Up to Join their flight they went again, into me rushing,
populated air and towards me north-east
It was with astonishment that they sighted Jagreen Lern's
horde, for they could not understand how it could have managed
to regroup itself so swiftly. Every fiend and warrior on
earth seemed to have come to fight under the Theocrat's
standard. It dung like a vile disease to me undulating plain.
And around it. clouds grew darker, even though lightning,
obviously of supernatural origin, blossomed and shouted,
criss-crossing the plain.
Into this noisy agitation swept me dragon .flight and they
recognised the force commanded by Jagreen Lern himself for
his banner flew above it Other divisions were commanded by
Dukes of Hell-Malohin, Zhortra, Xiombarg and others.
Also Eiric noted the three mightiest Lords of Chaos, dwarfing
me rest Charoros the Reaper with his great head and his
curving scythe, Mabelode me Faceless with his face always in
shadow no matter which way you looked at h, and SIortar
me Old, slim and beautiful, reputed me oldest of the gods.
This was a force which a thousand powerful sorcerers would
find it bard to defend against, and me thought of attacking
mem seemed folly.
Eiric did not bother to consider this for he had embarked
on his plan and was committed to carrying it through even
though, in his present condition, be was bound to destroy
himself if he continued.
They had the advantage of attacking from the air, but this
would only be of value while me dragons' venom lasted.
204 Michael Moorcock
When it gave out, they must go in closer. At that moment Elric
would need much energy-and he had none.
Down swept the dragons, shooting their incendiary venom
into the ranks of Chaos.
Normally, no army could stand against such an attack, but,
protected by sorcery, Chaos was able to turn much of the
fiery venom aside. The venom seemed to spread against an
invisible shield and dissipate. Some of it struck: its target,
however, and hundreds of warriors were engulfed in flame
and died blazing.
Again and again the dragons rose and dived upon their enemies,
Brie swaying almost unconscious in his saddle, his
awareness of what was going on diminishing with every attack.
His dimming vision was further encumbered by the stinking
smoke mat had begun to rise off the battlefield. From the
horde, huge lances were rising with seeming slowness, lances
of Chaos like streaks of amber lightning striking at me dragons
so that the beasts hit bellowed and burtlod dead to the
ground. Closer and closer, EIric's steed bore him until be was
flying over the division commanded by Jagreen Urn himself.
He caught a misty glimpse of the Theocrat sitting a repulsive,
hairless horse and waving his sword, convulsed with mocking
mirth. He faintly beard his enemy's voice drift up to him.
"Farewell. Brie-this is our last encounter, for today you
go to limbo!"
Brie turned Flamefaag about and whispered into his ear:
"That one, brother-that one"*
With a roar, Plamefang loosed his venom at me laughing
TbeocraL It seemed to Eiric that Jagreen Lern must surely be
burned to ashes, but just as the venom seemed to touch him*
it was buried back and only a few drops struck some of the
Theocrat's retainers, igniting their flesh and clothing.
Stiu Jagreen Lern laughed and now he released an amber
Spear which had appeared in his hand. Straight towards Eiric
it went and, with difficulty, the albino put up his Chaos
Shield to deflect it
So great was the force of the bolt striking his shield that he
was buried backwards in his saddle and one of the straps securing
him snapped so that he fen to the left and was only
saved by the other strap that had held. Now he crouched behind
the shield's protection as it was battered with supernatural
weapons. Flamefang, too, was encompassed by the shield's
STORMfiMNGER 205
great power; but how long would even me Chaos Shield resist
mch an attack?
It seemed mat he was forced to use me shield for an infinite
time before Flamefang's wings cracked me air like ships
and he was rushing high above me horde.
He was dying.
Minute by minute me vitality was leaving him as If he
were an old man ready for death. "I cannot die," be muttered*
"I must not die. Is mere no escape from this dilemma?"
Flamefang seemed to hear him. The dragon descended
towards me ground again and dropped until its scaly belly
was scraping the lances of me horde. Then Flamefang had
landed on the unstable ground and waited with folded wings
as a group of warriors goaded their beasts towards him.
Eiric gasped: "What have you done, Flamefang? Is nothing
dependable? You have delivered me into me hands of the enemy!**
With great effort he drew bis sword as the first lance struck
his shield and me rider passed, grinning, sensing EIric's
weakness. Others came on both sides. Weakly, he slashed at
one and Stormbringer suddenly took control to make his aim
true. The rider's arm was pierced and he was locked to the
blade as h fed, greedily, upon his life-stuff. Immediately, Eiric
felt some slight return of strength and realised that between
them dragon and sword were helping him gain the
energy be needed. But the blade kept the most part to itself.
There was a reason for this, as Eiric found out at once, for
the sword continued to direct bis arm. Several more riders
were slain in this manner and Eiric grinned as he felt the vitality
flowing back into his body. His vision cleared, his reactions
became normal, his spirits rose. Now he carried the
attack to the rest of me division, Flamefang moving over the
ground with a speed belying his bulk. The warriors scattered
and fled back to rejoin the main force, but Eiric no longer
cared, he had me souls of a dozen of them and it was
enough. "Now up. Flamefang! Rise and let us seek out more
powerful enemies!**
Obediently Flamefang spread his wings. They began to flap
and bear him off me ground until be was gliding low over the
horde.
In the midst of Lord Xiombarg's division, Eiric landed
again, dismounted from Flamefang and, possessed of his su-
206 Michael Moorcock
pernatural energy, rushed into the ranks of fiendish warriors,
hewing about him, invulnerable to all but the strongest attack
of Chaos. Vitality mounted and a kind of battle-madness with
it. Further and further into the ranks he sliced his way, until
he saw Lord Xiombarg in his earthly guise of a slender,
dark-haired woman. Eiric knew that the woman's shape was
no indication of Xiombarg's mighty strength but, without
fear. he leapt forwards the Duke of Hell and stood before
him, looking up at where he sat on his lion-headed, bullbodied
mount
Xiombarg's girl's voice came sweetly to Eiric's ears. "Mortal,
you have defied many Dukes of Hell and banished others
back to the Higher Worlds. They call you god-slayer now, so
I've heard. Can you slay me?"
"You know that no mortal can slay one of the Lords of
the Higher Worlds whether they be of Law or Chaos, Xiombarg-but
he can, if equipped with sufficient power, destroy
their earthly semblance and send them back to their own
plane, never to return?"
"Can you do this to me?"
"Let us see!" Eiric flung himself towards the Dark Lord.
Xiombarg was armed with a long-shafted battle-axe that
gave off a night-blue radiance. As his steed reared, he swung
the axe down at Eiric's unprotected head. The albino flung
up bis shield and the axe struck h. A kind of metallic shout
came from the weapons and huge sparks flew away. Eiric
moved in close and hacked at one of Xiombarg's feminine
legs. A light moved down from his hips and protected the leg
so that Stormbringer was brought to a stop, jarring Eiric's
arm. Again the axe struck the shield with the same effect as
before. Again Eiric tried to pierce Xiombarg's unholy defence.
And all the while he heard the Dark Lord's laughter,
sweetly modulated, yet as horrible as a hag's.
"Your mockery of human shape and human beauty begins
to fail, my lord!" cried Eiric, standing back for a moment to
gather his strength.
Already the giri's face was writhing and changing as, disconcerted
by Eiric's power, the Duke of Hell spurred bis
beast down on the albino.
Eiric dodged aside and struck again. This time Stormbringer
throbbed in his hand as it pierced Xiombarg's de-
fence and the Dark Lord moaned, retaliating with another
CTORMBRINGER 207
axe-blow which Eiric barely succeeded in blocking. He turned
his beast, the axe rushing about his head as be whirled it and
flung it at Eiric with the intention of striking him in the head.
" Eiric ducked and put up bis shield, the axe clipping it and
foiling to the shifting ground. He ran after Xiombarg who
was once again turning his steed. From nowhere he had produced
another weapon, a huge double-handed broadsword,
the breadth of its blade triple that of even Stonnbringer's. It
seemed incongruous in the small, delicate hands of the
girl-shape. And its size, Eiric guessed, told something of its
power. He backed away warily, noting absently that one of
the Dark Lord's legs was missing and replaced by an insectlike
mandible. If be could only destroy the rest of Xiombarg's
disguise, he would have succeeded in banishing him.
Now Xiombarg's laughter was no longer sweet, but had an
unhinged note. The lion-head roared in unison with its master's
voice as it rushed towards Eiric. The monstrous sword
went up and crashed upon the Chaos Shield. Eiric fell on his
back, feeling the ground itch and crawl beneath him, but me
shield was still in one piece. He caught sight of the bullhooves
pounding down on him, drew himself beneath the
shield, leaving only his sword-arm free. As the beast thundered
above, seeking to crush him with its hooves, he thrust
upwards into its belly. The sword was initially halted and
then seemed to pierce through whatever obstructed it and
draw out the life-force. The vitality of the unholy beast
passed from sword to man and Eiric was taken aback by its
strange, insensate quality, for the soul-stuff of an animal was
different from that of an intelligent protagonist. He rolled
from under me beast's bulk and sprang to his feet as the
lion-bull collapsed, hurling Xiombarg's still-earthly shape to
the ground.
Instantly the Dark Lord was up, standing with a peculiarly
unbalanced stance with one leg human and the other alien. It
limped swiftly towards Eiric, bringing me huge sword round
in a sideways movement that would slice Eiric in two. But Eiric.
full of the energy gained from Xiombarg's steed, leapt
back from the blow and struck at the sword with Stormbringer.
The two blades met, but neither gave. Stormbringer
shrieked in anger for it was unused to resistance of this kind.
Eiric got the rim of his shield under the blade and forced it
up. For an instant Xiombarg's guard was open and Eiric
208 Micfwel Moorcock
used that instant with effect, driving Stonnbringer into the
Dark Lord's breast with all his strength.
Xiombarg whimpered and at once his earthly shape began
to dissolve as Elric*s sword sucked his energy into itself. Eiric
knew that this energy was only that fraction constituting
Xiombarg's life-force on this plane, that the maysr part of the
Dark Lord's soid was still in the Higher Worlds for not even
the most powerful of these godlmgs could summon the power
to transport all of himself to the earth. If Eiric had taken every
scrap of Xiombarg's soul. his own body could not have
retained it but would have burst. However, so much more
powerful than any human soul was the force Sowing into him
from the wound he had made, that he was once again the
vessel for a mighty energy.
Xiombarg changed. He became little more than a flickering
coil of coloured light which began to drift away and finally
vanish as XJombarg was swept, raging, back to his own
plane.
Eiric looked upwards. He was horrified to see that only a
few of the dragons survived. One was fluttering down now
and it had a rider on its back. From that distance he could
not see which of his friends it was.
He began to run towards the place where it fellHe
heard the crash as it came to ground, heard a weird
vailing, a bubbling cry and then nothing.
He battled his way through the milling warriors of Chaos
and none could withstand him, until he came at last to the
fallen dragon. There was a broken body lying on the ground
beside it, but of the ruoeblade there was no sign. It had vanished.
It was the body of Dyvim Slonn, last of his kinsmen.
There was no time for mourning. Eiric and Moonglum and
the bare score of remaining dragons could not possibly win
against Jagrecn Lem's strength, which had been hardly
touched by the attack. Standing over the body of bis cousin,
be placed the Horn of Fate to his lips, took a huge breath
and blew. The clear, melancholy note of the horn rang out
over the battlefield and seemed to carry in all directions,
through all the dimensions of the cosmos, through all the
myriad planes and existences, through all eternity to the ends
of the universe and the ends of Time itself.
STORMBRINGER 209
The note took long moments to fade and. when it had at
last died away, there was an absolute hush over the world,
the muling millions were still, there was an air of expectancy.
And then the White Lords came.
Five
It was as if some enormous sun, thousands of times larger
than earth's, had sent a ray of light pulsing through the cos*
mos, defying the flimsy barriers of Time and Space, to strike
upon that great black battlefield. And along it, appearing on
the pathway that the horn's weird power had created for
them, strode the majestic Lords of Law, their earthly forms
so beautiful that they challenged Elite's sanity, for his mind
could scarcely absorb the sight. They disdained to ride, like
the Lords of Chaos, on bizarre beasts* but moved without
steeds, a magnificent assembly with their mirror-clear armour
and rippling surcoats bearing the single Arrow of Law.
Leading them came Donblas die Justice Maker, a smile
upon his perfect Ups. He carried a slender sword in his right
hand, a sword that was straight and sharp and like a beam of
light itself.
EIric moved swiftly then, rushed to where Flamefang
awaited him and urged the great reptile into the moaning air.
Flamefang moved with less ease than earlier, but EIric did
not know whether it was because the beast was tired or
whether the influence of Law was weighing on toe dragon
which was, after all, a creation of Chaos.
But at last be flew beside Moonglum and, looking around,
saw that the remaining dragons had turned and were flying
back. to the West. Only their own steeds remained. Perhaps
the last of the dragons had sensed their part played and were
returning to the Dragon Caves to sleep again.
EIric and Moongkun exchanged glances but said nothing,
for the sight below was too awe inspiring to speak of.
A light, white and damling. spread from the midst of the
Lords of Law, the beam upon which they had come faded,
and they began to move towards the cpot where Chardros the
Reaper, Mabelode the Faceless, and Slortar the Old and the
210
STORMBRINGER 211
lesser Lords of Chaos had assembled themselves, ready for
the great fight
As the White Lords passed through the other denizens of
hell and the polluted men who were their comrades, these
creatures backed away screaming, falling where the radiance
touched them. The dross was being cleaned away without effort-but
the real strength in the shape of the Dukes of Hell
and Jagreen Lem was still to be encountered.
Though at this stage the Lords of Law were scarcely taller
than the human beings, they seemed to dwarf them and even
EIric. high above, felt as if h& were a tiny figure, scarcely
larger than a fly. It was not their size so much as the implication
of vastness which they seemed to carry with them.
Flamefang's wings beat wearily as he circled over the
scene. AH around him the dark colours were now full of
clouds of lighter, softer shades.
The Lords of Law reached the spot where their ancient enemies
were assembled and EIric heard Lord Donblas's voice
carry up to him.
"You of Chaos have defied the edict of the Cosmic Balance
and sought complete dominance of this planet. Destiny
denies you this-for the earth's life is over and it must be
resurrected in a new form where your influence will be
weak."
A sweet, mocking voice came from the ranks of Chaos. It
was the voice of Slortar the Old., "You presume too much,
brother. The fate of the earth has not yet been finally decided.
Our meeting will result in that decision-nothing else.
If we win. Chaos shall rule. If you succeed in banishing us,
then paltry Law bereft of possibility will gain ascendancy.
But we shall win-though Fate herself complainsi"
"Then let this thing be settled." replied Lord Donblas. and
EIric saw the shining Lords of Law advance towards their
dark opponents.
The very sky shook as they clashed. The air cried out and
the earth appeared to tilt Those lesser beings left alive scattered
away from the conflict and a sound like a million
throbbing harp-strings, each of a subtly variated pitch, began
to emanate from the warring gods.
EIric saw Jagreen Lern leave the ranks of the Dukes of
Hell and ride in his flaming scarlet armour, away from them.
He realised, perhaps, that his impertinence would be swiftly
rewarded by death.
212 Michael ^Soorcock
Brie sent Plamefang soaring down and he drew Stormbringer,
yelling the Theocrat's name and shouting challenges.
Jagreen Lero looked up, but be did not laugh tbia time. He
increased hb speed until, as Eric had already noted, he saw
towards what he was riding. Ahead, the earth had turned to
black and purple gas that danced frenetically as if seeking to
free itself from the rest of the atmosphere. Jagreen Lcm
halted bis hairless horse and drew his WBMXC from his belt
He raised his flame-red buckler which, like Eiric's. was
treated against sorceraus weapons.
The dragon hurtled groundwards making Erie gasp with
the speed of its descent It flapped to earth a few yards from
where Jagreen Lem sat his horrible horse, waiting, philosophically,
for Eiric to attack. Perhaps be sensed that their fight
would mirror the larger fight going on around mem, that the
outcome of me one would be reflected in the outcome of the
other. Whatever it was, he did not indulge in his usual braggadocio,
but waited in silence.
Careless whether Jagreen Lem had the advantage or not,
Eiric dismounted and spoke to FIamefang in a purring murmur.
"Back, Flamefang, now. Back with your brothers. Whatever
cornea to pass, if I win or lose, your part is over." As
FIamefang stirred and turned his huge head to look into Eiric's
face, another dragon descended and landed a short distance
away. Moonglum, too, dismounted, beginning to
advance through the black and purple mist Eiric shouted to
him: "I want no help in this, MoongiumF
Til give you none. But it will be my pleasure to see you
take his life and soul I"
Eiric looked at Jagreen Lem whose face was still impassive.
Flamefang*s wings beat and he swept up into me sky and
was soon gone, the other dragon following. He would not re-
turn.
Eiric stalked towards the Theocrat, his shield high aod his
sword ready, Then. with astonishment, he saw Jagreen Lern
dismount from his own grotesque mount and slap its hairiess
rump to send it galloping away. He stood waiting, slightly
crouched in a position which emphasised his high-shouldered
stance. His long, dark face was taut and his eyes fixed on Eiric
as the albino came closer. An unstable smile of anticipation
quivered on the Theocrat's Ups and his eyes flickered.
STORMBRINGER 213
Eiric paused just before he came within sword-reach of his
enemy. "Jagreen Lern. are you ready to pay for the crimes
you've committed against me and the world?**
"Pay? Crimes? You surprise me, Eiric, for I see you have
fully absorbed the carping attitude of your new allies. In my
conquests I have found it necessary to eliminate a few of
your friends who sought to stop me. But that was to be expected.
I did what I had to and what I intended-if I have
fafled now, I have no regret, for regret is a fool's emotion
and useless in any capacity. What happened to your wife was
no direct fault of mine. Will you have triumph if you slay
me?"
Eiric shook his head. "My perspectives have. indeed,
changed, Jagreen Lem. Yet we of Melnibone were ever a
vengeful brood-and vengeance is what I claimi"
"Ah, now I understand you." Jagreen Lem changed his
stance and he raised his axe to the defensive position. "I am
ready."
Eiric leapt at him, Stormbringer shrieking through the air
to crash against the scariet buckler and crash again. Three
blows he delivered before Jagreen Lern's axe sought to
wriggle through his defence and he halted it by a sideways
movement of the Chaos Shield. The axe succeeded only in
grazing his arm near the shoulder. Eiric's shield clanged
against Jagreen Lera's and Eiric attempted to exert his weight
and push the Theocrat backwards, meanwhile stabbing
around Ae rims of the locked shields and trying to penetrate
Jagreen Lem*s guard.
For some moments they remained in this position while the
music of the battle sounded around them and the ground
seemed to fall from under them, columns of blossoming
colours erupting, like magical plants, on all sides. Then
Jagreen Lem jumped back, slashing at Eiric. The albino
rushed forward, ducked and struck at the Theocrat's leg near
the knee-and missed. From above, the axe dashed down and
be flung himself to one side to avoid it. Carried off-balance
by the force of the blow, Jagreen Lern staggered and Eiric
leapt up and kicked at the small of the Theocrafs back. The
man fell sprawling, losing bis grip on both axe and shield as
be tried to do many things at once and failed to do anything.
Ehic put his heel on the Theocrat's neck and held him there,
Stonnbringer hovering greedily over his prone enemy.
Jagreen Lem heaved his body round so that he looked up
214 Michael Moorcock
at Eiric. He was suddenly pale and his eyes were fixed on the
black hcllblade when he spoke hoarsely to Eiric. "Finish me
now. There's no place for my soul in all eternity-not any
more. I must go to limbo-so finish met**
Brie was about to allow Stonnbringer to plunge itself into
the defeated Theocrat when he stayed the weapon, holding it
back from its prey with difficulty. The nmesword murmured
in frustration and tugged in his hand.
"No," he said slowly. "I want Doming of yours. Jagreen
Lem. I would not pollute my being by feeding off your soul.
Moooglumi" His friend ran up. "Moonglum, hand me your
blade."
Silently, the little Easflaoder obeyed. Eiric sheathed the
resisting Stonnbringer, saying to ft: "There-(hat's the first
time I've stopped you from feeding. What will you do now, I
wonder?" Then he took Moonglum's blade and slashed it
across Jagreen Lcra's cheek, opening it up in a long, deep cut
which began slowly to fill with blood,
The Theocrat screamed.
"No. Eiric-tffl me!"
With an absent smile, Eiric slashed the other cheek. His
bloody face contorted, Jagreen Lern shouted for death, but
Eiric continued to smile his vague, half-aware smile, and said
softly: "You sought to imitate the Emperors of 'Melnibooe,
did you not? You mocked Eiric of that line, you tortured.him
and you abducted his wife. You moulded her body into a
hell-shape as you moulded the rest of the world. You slew Elric's
friends and challenged him in your impertinence. But
you are nothing-you are more of a pawn than Eiric ever
was. Now. little roan. know how the folk of Melnibone toyed
with such upstarts in the days when they ruled the woridF
Jagreen Lern took an hour to die and only then because
Moooglum begged Eiric to finish him swiftly.
Eiric handed Moonglum's tainted sword back to him after
wiping it on a shred of fabric that had been part of the Theocrat's
robe. He looked down at the mutilated body and stirred
it with his foot, then he looked away to where the Lords of
the Higher Worlds were embattled.
He was badly weakened from the fight and also from the
energy he had been forced to exert to return the resisting
Stonnbringer to its sheath, but this was forgotten as he stared
in wonder at the gigantic battle.
Both the Lords of Law and those of Chaos had become
STORMBRINGER
215
huge and misty as their earthly mass diminished and they
continued to fight in human shape. They were like half-real
giants, fighting everwhere now-on the land and above it
Far away on the rim of the horizon, he saw Donblas the Justice
Maker engaged with Chardros the Reaper, their outlines
flickering and spreading, the slim sword daring and the great
scythe sweeping.
Unable to participate, unsure which side was winning, Eiric
and Moonglum watched as the intensity of the battle increased
and, with it, the slow dissolution of the gods' earthly
manifestation. The fight was no longer merely on the earth
but seemed to be raging throughout all the planes of the cosmos
and, as if in unison with this transformation, the earth
appeared to be losing its form, until Eiric and Moonglum
drifted in the mingled swiri of air, fire, earth and water.
The earth dissolved-yet still the Lords of the Higher
Worlds battled over it
The stuff of the earth alone remained, but unformed. Its
components were still in existence, but their new shape was
undecided. The fight continued. The victors would have the
privilege of re-forming the earth.
Six
At last, though Eiric did not know how, the turbulent dart
gave way to light, and there came a noise-a cosmic roar of
hate and frustration-and he knew that the Lords of Chaos
had been defeated and banished. The Lords of Law victorious,
Fate's plan had been achieved, though it still required
the last note of the hom to bring it to its required conclusion.
And Eiric realised be did not have the strength left to blow
the hom the third time.
About the two friends, the worid was taking on a distinct
shape again. They found they were standing on a rocky plain
and in the distance were the slender peaks of new-formed
mountains, purple against a mellow sky.
Then the earth began to move. Faster and faster it whirled,
day giving way to night with incredible rapidity, and then it
began to slow until the sun was again all but motionless in
the sky, moving with something like its customary speed.
The change had taken place. Law ruled here now. yet the
Lords of Law had departed without thanks.
And though Law ruled, it could not progress until the horn
was blown for the last time.
"So it is over," Moonglum murmured. "All gone-Elwher,
my birth-place, Karlaak by the Weeping Waste, Bakshaan,
even the Dreaming City and the Isle of Melnibone. They no
longer exist, they cannot be retrieved. And this is the new
worid formed by Law. It looks much the same as the old.*'
Eiric, too, was filled with a sense of loss, knowing that all
the places that were familiar to him, even the very continents
were gone and replaced by different ones. It was like the loss
of childhood and perhaps that was what it was-the passing
of the earth's childhood.
He shrugged away the thought and smiled. *Tm supposed
to blow the hom for the final time if me earth's new life is to
216
217
begin. Yet I haven't the strength. Pcrhapi Fate la to be
thwarted after all?"
Moonglum looked at him strangely. "I hope not, friend."
Eiric sighed. "We are the last two left, Moongtum. you and
L It n fittmg that even the mighty events that have taken
place have not burned our friendship, have not separated w.
You are the only friead whose company has not worn on me,
the only one I have trusted."
Moonghnn grinned a shadow of his old, cocky grin. "And
where we've shared adventures, I've usually profited if you
have not The partnership has been complementary. I shall
never know why I chose to share your destiny. Perhaps ft was
no doing of mine, but Fate's, for there n one final act of
friendship I can perform.. .**
Eiric was about to question Moonglum when a quiet voice
came from behind him.
"I bear two messages. One of thanks from me Lords of
Law-and another from a more powerful entity."
"SepirizF Eiric turned to face his mentor. "Wen. are yon
satisfied with my work?**
"Aye-greatly." Sepiriz's face was sad and he stared at Eiric
with a look of profound sympathy. "You have succeeded
in everything but the last act which is to blow the Horn of
Fate for the thud time. Because of you me world shall know
progression and its new people shall have me opportunity to
advance by degrees to a new state of being."
"But what is the meaning of it all?" Eiric said. "That 2
have never fully understood.**
Who can? Who can know wfay me Cosmic Balance exists,
why Fate exists and the Lords of the Higher Worlds. Why
mere must always be a champion to fight such battles? There
seems to be an infinity of space and time and possibilities.
There may be an infinite number of beings, one above me
other, who see the final purpose, though, in infinity, there can
be no final purpose. Perhaps all is cyclic and this same event
win occur again and again until the universe is run down and
fades away as me worid we knew has faded. Meaning, Eiric?
Do not seek that. for madness lies in such a course.'*
"No meaning, no pattern. Then why have I suffered aU
A^
"Perhaps even the gods seek meaning and pattern and this
is merely one attempt to find it. Look-" he waved his hands
to indicate the newly-formed earth. "All this is fresh and
218 Michael Moorcock
moulded by logic. Perhaps the logic wiu control the newcomers,
perhaps a factor will occur to destroy that logic. The
gods experiment, the Cosmic Balance guides the destiny.of
the earth, men struggle and credit the gods with knowing why
they struggle-but do the gods know?"
"You disturb me further when I had hoped to be comforted."
he sighed. "I have lost wife and worid-and do not
know why."
"I am sony. I have come to wish you farewell, nay friend.
Do what you must."
"Aye. Shall I see you again?"
"No, for we are both truly dead. Our age has gone.**
Sepiriz seemed to twist in the air and disappear.
A cold silence remained.
At length Eiric's thoughts were interrupted by Moonghnn.
"You must blow the horn, Eiric. Whether ft means nothing or
much-you must Mow it and finish this business forever!**
"How? I have scarcely enough strength to stand on my
feet"
"I have decided what you roust do. Slay roe with
Stonnbringer. Take my soul and vitality into yourself-then
you will have sufficient power to blow the last blast**
-Kill you, MoonglumI The only one left-my only true
friend? You babble"*
"I mean it You must, for there is nothing else to do. Further,
we have no place here and roust die soon at any rate.
You told me how Zarozinia gave you her soul-weu. take
mine,tool"
"I cannot"
Moooglum paced towards him and reached down to grip
Stormbmger's hilt, pulling it half-way from the sheath.
-Wo, Moonglum!"
But now the sword sprang from the sheath on its own voli-
tion. Eiric struck Moonglum's hand away and gripped the
hilt He could not stop it The sword rose up. dragging his
arm with it, poised to deliver a blow,
Moonglum stood with his arms by bis side, his face expressionless,
though Eiric thought be glimpsed a flicker of
fear in the eyes. He struggled to control the blade, but knew
it was impossible.
"Let it do its work, Eiric.**
The blade plunged forward and pierced Moonglum's heart.
STORMBRINGER 219
His blood sprang out and covered it His eyes blurred and
filled with horror. "Ah. no-I-had-not-expected thisi"
Petrified, Eiric could not tug the sword from his friend's
heart Moongluro's energy began to flow up its length and
course into his body, yet, even when all the little Eastlander's
vitality was absorbed. Eiric remained staring at the small
corpse untfl the tears flowed from his crimson eyes and a
great sob racked him- Then the blade came free.
He flung it away from him and it did not clatter on die
rocky ground but landed as a body might land. Then it
seemed to move towards him and stop and be had the suspicion
mat it was watching him.
He took the hom and put it to his Ups. He blew the blast
to herald in the night of the new earth. The night that would
precede the new dawn. And though the horn's note was triumphant,
Eiric was not He stood full of infinite loneliness
and infinite sorrow, his head tilted back as me sound rang on.
And, when the note faded from triumph to a dying echo that
expressed something of Eiric's misery, a huge outline began
to form in the sky above the earth, as if summoned by the
hom.
It was the outline of a gigantic hand holding a balance and,
as he watched, the balance began to right itself until each
side was true.
And somehow this relieved Eiric's sorrow as he released his
grip on the Horn of Fate.
"There is something, at least,** he said, "and if ifs an illusion,
then it's a reassuring one."
He turned his head to one side and saw the blade leave the
ground, sweep into the air and then rush down on him.
"Stonnbringer!" be cried, and then the helsword struck his
chest, he felt the icy touch of the blade against bis heart,
reached out his fingers to clutch at ft, felt his body constrict,
felt it sucking his soul from me very depths of his being, felt
his whole personality being drawn into the nmesword. He
knew, as his life faded to combine with the sword's, that it
had always been his destiny to die in this manner. With the
blade he had killed friends and lovers, stolen their souls to
feed his own waning strength. It was as if the sword had always
used him to this end, as if he was merely a manifestation
of Stonnbringer and was now being taken back into the
body of the blade which had never been a true sword. And,
as he died, he wept again, for be knew that the fraction of
220 Michael Moorcock
the sword's soul which was his would never know rest but
was doomed to immortality, to eternal struggle.
Eiric of Melnibone, last of the Bright Emperors, cried out,
and then his body collapsed, a sprawled husk beside its comrade,
and he lay beneath the mighty balance that still hung in
the sky.
Then Stormbringer's shape began to change, writhing and
curling above the body of the albino, finally to stand astraddle
it
The entity that was Stonnbringer. last manifestation of
Chaos which would remain with this new worid as it grew,
looked down on the corpse of Brie of Melnibon6 and smiled.
"Farewell, friend. I was a thousand times more evil than
thou!"
And then it leapt from the Earth and went spearing upwards,
its wild voice laughing mockery at the Cosmic Balance;
filling the universe with its unholy joy.
THE END
of the Saga of Eiric of Melmbone.
About the Author
Born in London in 1939, Michael Moorcock became involved
with the worlds of science fiction and fantasy at an early age. He
edited Tarzan Adventures at 17, and became the guiding hand
behind the British SF magazine New Worlds in 1964. A major
influence in the development of "New Wave" science fiction, he
encouraged the use of experimental styles and ground-breaking
topics in a movement which shocked many but changed the face of
science fiction. Asafantasist, Moorcock is best known for the Eiric
series, which A Reader's Guide to Fantasy describes as "a fourdimensional
superseries which is marked by consistently highquality
narrative prose and inventive plotting," and for the World
Fantasy Award winning novel Cloriana. Moorcock is a multiple
winner of the British Fantasy Award for novels and short fiction.
About the Artist
Robert Gould has been involved with the creation and publication
of Romantic Art for eight years. The artist's association with
Moorcock s Eiric of Melnibone began with an original graphic
story published in 1976 by Star-Reach Publications of California
His visualization of the world of Eiric continued variously in
books, portfolios and several posters. Moorcock has said of
Gould s cover designs for this new edition of the /ric series, "I
think they're tremendous . . I couldn't have asked for better."
Currently Robert Gould is in partnership with Mark Halperin
in CYGNUS which publishes his work and that of other contemporary
Romantic Artists in limited edition reproductions For
more information about the artist, contact: CYGNUS, 721 Massachusetts
Avenue, Arlington, MA, 02174.
Elric At The End of Time
Book 7 of Elric
by Michael Moorcock
version 1.0
Introduction
ELRIC AT THE END OF TIME was the last story I wrote
about the albino prince. In some ways it's an affectionate
commentary on the kind of fantasy hero with
whom I'm most closely identified and it's also based
on the remark made some years ago by M. John
Harrison that the people who inhabit my End of
Time stories might, from Elric's perspective, seem to
be the very Lords of Chaos themselves. The story
brings together elements from most of the series
which, by the mid-seventies, I was completing. It
was finished in 1977, originally for a book which Big
O intended to publish and which Rodney Matthews
would illustrate. Big O effectively folded before the
book could appear. The Rodney Matthews paintings
all exist, but only a few of them have been seen
(principally in Rodney's own 1983 Calendar) which
is a great pity, since they represent some of his best
and most ambitious work. The only previous appearance
of the story was in Terri Windling's and
Mark Arnold's Elsewhere anthology, which came out
in the USA in 1981.
The Last Enchantment was meant to be the final
Elric story. It was written in 1962, only a short while
after the first had appeared in magazine form and
before I wrote what was to become Stormbringer. I
gave the story to Ted Carnell for his magazine Science
Fantasy but he didn't want a "last" Elric story.
He persuaded me to write some more novellas and
in his capacity as my agent sent The Last Enchantment
to America, where it was rejected. Some fifteen years
later Ted's successor, Les Flood, came across the
story and returned it to me. It eventually appeared
in Ariel magazine in the U.S. in 1978, illustrated by
Tim Conrad. That was its only publication until now.
Like Elric at the End of Time it has never been published
in England and this is its first appearance in
book form.
The Sojan stories are my first fantasy tales to be
professionally published. They were begun in the
1950s for Tarzan Adventures, before I came to edit the
magazine. I was seventeen when they started to
appear and they were not published in book form
until Dave Britton and Mike Butterworth republished
them as Sojan, the first book they did as Savoy Editions.
It was re-illustrated by Jim Cawthorn, the original
illustrator who has worked with me through my
whole career as a writer of fantastic fiction. This
book was primarily a compendium of my earliest
work, together with some of my writing about my
own fiction and I have included one or two other
pieces from Sojan here.
The Stone Thing was written in response to a request
from Eric Bentcliffe, editor of the fanzine Triode,
which I used to write for in the fifties. It is one of
several parodies of my own work which I've done
over the years (some of which, it could be argued,
were not published as such) and it's one I'm particularly
fond of. Triode specialised in humorous "fan
fiction"-stories written about actual personalities in
the SF field-and dates from the period in which
science fiction fans did not take themselves quite so
seriously as nowadays, and those who made religion
from an enthusiasm were generally mocked for it. I
hope the story itself will show some readers that I
am neither in touch with secret supernatural forces
nor the spokesman for an illuminating new mystical
knowledge. As a matter of fact I'm by nature extraordinarily
sceptical of the supernatural. I have
always conceived my fantastic stories simply as thatfantastic
stories, escapist entertainment which hopes
to give some pleasure to the reader. Any profundities
in those romances are a tribute to the one who
discovers them rather than to me. For a long while
the exaggerated reaction of some readers to my fantasies
caused me to try to dismiss them altogether.
However, I should like to say that I denigrate neither
the stories nor their readers, though I do prefer
my comedies to my melodramas and personally would
put a greater value on books such as Gloriana, The
Condition of Muzak, Byzantium Endures or The Brothel
in Rosenstrasse. I've always had a happy facility for
fantasy and I suppose it's common enough for someone
to make less of something which comes easily to
them.
Some of the non-fiction pieces about Elric and Co.
which were in the original Sojan selection edited by
Dave Britton are still here, for whatever interest they
provide. I have Dave Britton and Mike Butterworth
to thank for many things, not least their willingness
to sift through long-forgotten piles of paper and find
manuscripts and tear-sheets (The Golden Barge would
never have been published had it not been for their
retaining a copy of the manuscript which I had
thought permanently lost) and I should also like to
recognise, once again, Ted Carnell's encouragement
as the editor of my first Elric stories, Peter Ledeboer's
kindness as the publisher who originally commissioned
the title story as a vehicle for Rodney Matthew's
illustrations, the present publishers Alison
Peacock, Simon Scott and Nick Webb of NEL and
the encouragement, inspiration and friendship of
many people, amongst them Jim Cawthorn, Eric
Bentcliffe, Ron Bennett, Alan Dodd, Arthur Thomson
and Ethel Lindsay who have known me since,
as an enthusiastic and, I'm sure, sometimes irritating
fifteen-year-old, I first began to write the Sojan stories.
Michael Moorcock,
Fulham Road
July 1983
ELRIC
Elric at the End of Time
1. In Which Mrs. Persson Detects An Above Average
Degree of Chaos In The Megaflow
RETURNING FROM China to London and the Spring of
1936, Una Persson found an unfamiliar quality of
pathos in most of the friends she had last seen, as
far as she recalled, during the Blitz on her way back
from 1970. Then they had been desperately hearty: it
was a comfort to understand that the condition was
not permanent. Here, at present, Pierrot ruled and
she felt she possessed a better grip on her power.
This was, she admitted with shame, her favourite
moral climate for it encouraged in her an enormously
gratifying sense of spiritual superiority: the advantage
of having been born, originally, into a later and
probably more sophisticated age. The 1960s. Some
women, she reflected, were forced to have children
in order to enjoy this pleasure.
But she was uneasy, so she reported to the local
Time Centre and the bearded, sullen features of Sergeant
Alvarez who welcomed her in white, apologising
for the fact that he had himself only just that
morning left the Lower Devonian and had not had
time to change.
"It's the megaflow, as you guessed," he told her,
operating toggles to reveal his crazy display systems.
"We've lost control."
"We never really had it." She lit a Sherman's and
shook her long hair back over the headrest of the
swivel chair, opening her military overcoat and loosening
her webbing. "Is it worse than usual?"
"Much." He sipped cold coffee from his battered
silver mug. "It cuts through every plane we can pick
up-a rogue current swerving through the dimensions.
Something of a twister."
"Jerry?"
"He's dormant. We checked. But it's like him,
certainly. Most probably another aspect."
"Oh, sod." Una straightened her shoulders.
"That's what I thought," said Alvarez. "Someone's
going to have to do a spot of rubato." He
studied a screen. It was Greek to Una. For a moment
a pattern formed. Alvarez made a note. "Yes. It can
either be fixed at the nadir or the zenith. It's too late
to try anywhere in between. I think it's up to you,
Mrs. P."
She got to her feet. "Where's the zenith?"
"The End of Time."
"Well," she said, "that's something."
She opened her bag and made sure of her jar of
instant coffee. It was the one thing she couldn't get
at the End of Time.
"Sorry," said Alvarez, glad that the expert had
been there and that he could remain behind.
"It's just as well," she said. "This period's no
good for my moral well-being. I'll be off, then."
"Someone's got to." Alvarez failed to seem sympathetic.
"It's Chaos out there."
"You don't have to tell me."
She entered the make-shift chamber and was on
her way to the End of Time.
2. In Which The Eternal Champion Finds Himself at the
End of Time
ELRIC OF MELNIBONE shook a bone-white fist at the
greedy, glaring stars-the eyes of all those men whose
souls he had stolen to sustain his own enfeebled
body. He looked down. Though it seemed he stood
on something solid, there was only more blackness
falling away below him. It was as if he hung at the
centre of the universe. And here, too, were staring
points of yellow light. Was he to be judged?
His half-sentient runesword, Stormbringer, in its
scabbard on his left hip, murmured like a nervous
dog.
He had been on his way to Imrryr, to his home, to
reclaim his kingdom from his cousin Yyrkoon; sailing
from the Isle of the Purple Towns where he had
guested with Count Smiorgan Baldhead. Magic winds
had caught the Filkharian trader as she crossed the
unnamed water between the Vilmirian peninsula and
the Isle of Melnibone She had been borne into the
Dragon Sea and thence to The Sorcerer's Isle, socalled
because that barren place had once been the
home of Cran Liret, the Thief of Spells, a wizard
infamous for his borrowings, who had, at length,
been dispatched by those he sought to rival. But
much residual magic had been left behind. Certain
spells had come into the keeping of the Krettii, a
tribe of near-brutes who had migrated to the island
from the region of The Silent Land less than fifty
years before. Their shaman, one Grrodd Ybene Eenr,
had made unthinking use of devices buried by the
dying sorcerer as the spells of his peers sucked life
and sanity from them. Elric had dealt with more
than one clever wizard, but never with so mindless a
power. His battle had been long and exhausting and
had required the sacrifice of most of the Filkharians
as well as the entire tribe of Krettii. His sorcery had
become increasingly desperate. Sprite fought sprite,
devil fell upon devil, in planes both physical and
astral, all around the region of The Sorcerer's Isle.
Eventually Elric had mounted a massive summoning
against the allies of Grrodd Ybene Eenr with the
result that the shaman had been at last overwhelmed
and his remains scattered in Limbo. But Elric, captured
by his own monstrous magickings, had followed
his enemy and now he stood in the Void,
crying out into appalling silence, hearing his words
only in his skull:
"Arioch! Arioch! Aid me!"
But his patron Duke of Hell was absent. He could
not exist here. He could not, for once, even hear his
favourite protege.
"Arioch! Repay my loyalty! I have given you blood and
souls!"
He did not breathe. His heart had stopped. All his
movements were sluggish.
The eyes looked down at him. They looked up at
him. Were they glad? Did they rejoice in his terror?
"Arioch!"
He yearned for a reply. He would have wept, but
no tears would come. His body was cold; less than
dead, yet not alive. A fear was in him greater than
any fear he had known before.
"Oh, Arioch! Aid me!"
He forced his right hand towards the pulsing pommel
of Stormbringer which, alone, still possessed
energy. The hilt of the sword was warm to his touch
and, as slowly he folded his fingers around it, it
seemed to swell in his fist and propel his arm upwards
so that he did not draw the sword. Rather the
sword forced his limbs into motion. And now it
challenged the void, glowing with black fire, singing
its high, gleeful battlesong.
"Our destinies are intertwined, Stormbringer," said
Elric. "Bring us from this place, or those destinies
shall never be fulfilled."
Stormbringer swung like the needle of a compass
and Elric's unfeeling arm was wrenched round to go
with it. In eight directions the sword swung, as if to
the eight points of Chaos. It was questing-like a
hound sniffing a trail. Then a yell sounded from
within the strange metal of the blade; a distant cry of
delight, it seemed to Elric. The sound one would
hear if one stood above a valley listening to children
playing far below.
Elric knew that Stormbringer had sensed a plane
they might reach. Not necessarily their own, but one
which would accept them. And, as a drowning mariner
must yearn for the most inhospitable rock rather
than no rock at all, Elric yearned for that plane.
"Stormbringer. Take us there."
The sword hesitated. It moaned. It was suspicious.
"Take us there!" whispered the albino to his runesword.
The sword struck back and forth, up and down, as
if it battled invisible enemies. Elric scarcely kept his
grip on it. It seemed that Stormbringer was frightened
of the world it had detected and sought to
drive it back but the act of seeking had in itself set
them both in motion. Already Elric could feel himself
being drawn through the darkness, towards something
he could see very dimly beyond the myriad
eyes, as dawn reveals clouds undetected in the night
sky.
Elric thought he saw the shapes of crags, pointed
and crazy. He thought he saw water, flat and iceblue.
The stars faded and there was snow beneath
his feet, mountains all around him, a huge, blazing
sun overhead-and above that another landscape, a
desert, as a magic mirror might reflect the contrasting
character of he who peered into it-a desert, quite as
real as the snowy peaks in which he crouched, sword
in hand, waiting for one of these landscapes to fade
so that he might establish, to a degree, his bearings.
Evidently the two planes had intersected.
But the landscape overhead did not fade. He could
look up and see sand, mountains, vegetation, a sky
which met his own sky at a point half-way along the
curve of the huge sun-and blended with it. He
looked about him. Snowy peaks in all directions.
Above-desert everywhere. He felt dizzy, found that
he was staring downward, reaching to cup some of
the snow in his hand. It was ordinary snow, though
it seemed reluctant to melt in contact with his flesh.
"This is a world of Chaos," he muttered. "It obeys
no natural laws." His voice seemed loud, amplified
by the peaks, perhaps. "That is why you did not
want to come here. This is the world of powerful
rivals."
Stormbringer was silent, as if all its energy were
spent. But Elric did not sheath the blade. He began
to trudge through the snow toward what seemed to
be an abyss. Every so often he glanced upward, but
the desert overhead had not faded, sun and sky
remained the same. He wondered if he walked around
the surface of a miniature world. That if he continued
to go forward he might eventually reach the
point where the two landscapes met. He wondered
if this were not some punishment wished upon him
by his untrustworthy allies of Chaos. Perhaps he
must choose between death in the snow or death in
the desert. He reached the edge of the abyss and
looked down.
The walls of the abyss fell for all of five feet before
reaching a floor of gold and silver squares which
stretched for perhaps another seven feet before they
reached the far wall, where the landscape continuedsnow
and crags-uninterrupted.
"This is undoubtedly where Chaos rules," said
the Prince of Melnibone. He studied the smooth,
chequered floor. It reflected parts of the snowy terrain
and the desert world above it. It reflected the
crimson-eyed albino who peered down at it, his features
drawn in bewilderment and tiredness.
"I am at their mercy," said Elric. "They play with
me. But I shall resist them, even as they destroy
me." And some of his wild, careless spirit came back
to him as he prepared to lower himself onto the
chequered floor and cross to the opposite bank.
He was half-way over when he heard a grunting
sound in the distance and a beast appeared, its paws
slithering uncertainly on the smooth surface, its seven
savage eyes glaring in all directions as if it sought
the instigator of its terrible indignity.
And, at last, all seven eyes focused on Elric and
the beast opened a mouth in which row upon row of
thin, vicious teeth were arranged, and uttered a growl
of unmistakable resentment.
Elric raised his sword. "Back, creature of Chaos.
You threaten the Prince of Melnibone."
The beast was already propelling itself towards
him. Elric flung his body to one side, aiming a blow
with the sword as he did so, succeeding only in
making a thin incision in the monster's heavily muscled
hind leg. It shrieked and began to turn.
"Back."
Elric's voice was the brave, thin squeak of a lemming
attacked by a hawk. He drove at the thing's
snout with Stormbringer. The sword was heavy. It
had spent all its energy and there was no more to
give. Elric wondered why he, himself, did not weaken.
Possibly the laws of nature were entirely abolished
in the Realm of Chaos. He struck and drew blood.
The beast paused, more in astonishment than fear.
Then it opened its jaws, pushed its back legs against
the snowy bank, and shot towards the albino who
tried to dodge it, lost his footing, and fell, sprawling
backwards, on the gold and silver surface.
3. In Which Una Persson Discovers An Unexpected Snag
THE GIGANTIC beetle, rainbow carapace glittering,
turned as if into the wind, which blew from the
distant mountains, its thick, flashing wings beating
rapidly as it bore its single passenger over the queer
landscape.
On its back Mrs. Persson checked the instruments
on her wrist. Ever since Man had begun to travel in
time it had become necessary for the League to develop
techniques to compensate for the fluctuations
and disruptions in the spacetime continua; perpetually
monitoring the chronoflow and megaflow. She
pursed her lips. She had picked up the signal. She
made the semi-sentient beetle swing a degree or two
SSE and head directly for the mountains. She was in
some sort of enclosed (but vast) environment. These
mountains, as well as everything surrounding them,
lay in the territory most utilised by the gloomy,
natural-born Werther de Goethe, poet and romantic,
solitary seeker after truth in a world no longer differentiating
between the degrees of reality. He would
not remember her, she knew, because, as far as
Werther was concerned, they had not met yet. He
had not even, if Una were correct, experienced his
adventure with Mistress Christia, the Everlasting Concubine.
A story on which she had dined out more
than once, in duller eras.
The mountains drew closer. From here it was possible
to see the entire arrangement (a creation of
Werther's very much in character): a desert landscape,
a central sun, and, inverted above it, winter
mountains. Werther strove to make statements, like
so many naive artists before him, by presenting simple
contrasts: The World is Bleak/The World is
Cold/Barren Am I As I Grow Old/Tomorrow I Die,
Entombed in Cold/For Silver My Poor Soul Was Soldshe
remembered he was perhaps the worst poet she
had encountered in an eternity of meetings with bad
poets. He had taught himself to read and write in
old, old English so that he might carve those words
on one of his many abandoned tombs (half his time
was spent in composing obituaries for himself). Like
so many others he seemed to equate self-pity with
artistic inspiration. In an earlier age he might have
discovered his public and become quite rich (selfpity
passing for passion in the popular understanding).
Sometimes she regretted the passing of Wheldrake,
so long ago, so far away, in a universe bearing
scarcely any resemblances to those in which she
normally operated.
She brought her wavering mind back to the problem.
The beetle dipped and circled over the desert,
but there was no sight of her quarry.
She was about to abandon the search when she
heard a faint roaring overhead and she looked up to
see another characteristic motif of Werther's-a gold
and silver chessboard on which, upside down, a
monstrous dog-like creature was bearing down on a
tiny white-haired man dressed in the most abominable
taste Una had seen for some time.
She directed the aircar upwards and then, reversing
the machine as she entered the opposing gravity,
downwards to where the barbarically costumed
swordsman was about to be eaten by the beast.
"Shoo!" cried Una commandingly.
The beast raised a befuddled head.
"Shoo."
It licked lips and returned its seven-eyed gaze to
the albino, who was now on his knees, using his
large sword to steady himself as he climbed to his
feet.
The jaws opened wider and wider. The pale man
prepared, shakily, to defend himself.
Una directed the aircar at the beast's unkempt
head. The great beetle connected with a loud crack.
The monster's eyes widened in dismay. It yelped. It
sat on its haunches and began to slide away, its
claws making an unpleasant noise on the gold and
silver tiles.
Una landed the aircar and gestured for the stranger
to enter. She noticed with distaste that he was a
somewhat unhealthy looking albino with gaunt features,
exaggeratedly large and slanting eyes, ears
that were virtually pointed, and glaring, half-mad
red pupils.
And yet, undoubtedly, it was her quarry and there
was nothing for it but to be polite.
"Do, please, get in," she said. "I am here to rescue
you."
"Shaarmraaam torjistoo quellahm vyeeanr," said the
stranger in an accent that seemed to Una to be vaguely
Scottish.
"Damn," she said, "that's all we need." She had
been anxious to approach the albino in private, before
one of the denizens of the End of Time could
arrive and select him for a menagerie, but now she
regretted that Werther or perhaps Lord Jagged were
not here, for she realised that she needed one of
their translation pills, those tiny tablets which could
"engineer" the brain to understand a new language.
By a fluke-or perhaps because of her presence here
so often-the people at the End of Time currently
spoke formal early twentieth-century English.
The albino-who wore a kind of tartan divided
kilt, knee-length boots, a blue and white jerkin, a
green cloak and a silver breastplate, with a variety of
leather belts and metal buckles here and there upon
his person-was vehemently refusing her offer of a
lift. He raised the sword before him as he backed
away, slipped once, reached the bank, scrambled
through snow and disappeared behind a rock.
Mrs. Persson sighed and put the car into motion
again.
4. In Which The Prince of Melnibone Encounters Further
Terrors
XIOMBARG HERSELF, thought Elric as he slid beneath
the snows into the cave. Well, he would have no
dealings with the Queen of Chaos; not until he was
forced to do so.
The cave was large. In the thin light from the gap
above his head he could not see far. He wondered
whether to return to the surface or risk going deeper
into the cave. There was always the hope that he
would find another way out. He was attempting to
recall some rune that would aid him, but all he knew
depended either upon the aid of elementals who did
not exist on this plane, or upon the Lords of Chaos
themselves-and they were unlikely to come to his
assistance in their own Realm. He was marooned
here: the single mouse in a world of cats.
Almost unconsciously he found himself moving
downwards, realising that the cave had become a
tunnel. He was feeling hungry but, apart from the
monster and the woman in the magical carriage, had
seen no sign of life. Even the cavern did not seem
entirely natural.
It widened; there was phosphorescent light. He
realised that the walls were of transparent crystal
and, behind the walls, were all manner of artefacts.
He saw crowns, sceptres and chains of precious jewels;
cabinets of complicated carving; weapons of
strangely turned metal; armour, clothing, things
whose use he could not guess-and food. There
were sweetmeats, fruits, flans and pies, all out of
reach.
Elric groaned. This was torment. Perhaps deliberately
planned torment. A thousand voices whispered
to him in a beautiful, alien language: "Bie-meee . . .
Bie-meee ..." the voices murmured. "Baa-gen baagen
. . ."
They seemed to be promising every delight, if
only he could pass through the walls; but they were
of transparent quartz, lit from within. He raised
Stormbringer, half-tempted to try to break down the
barrier, but he knew that even his sword was, at its
most powerful, incapable of destroying the magic of
Chaos.
He paused, gaping with astonishment at a group
of small dogs which looked at him with large brown
eyes, tongues lolling, and jumped up at him.
"O, Nee Tubbens!" intoned one of the voices.
"Gods." screamed Elric. "This torture is too much!"
He swung his body this way and that, threatening
with his sword, but the voices continued to murmur
and promise, displaying their riches but never allowing
him to touch.
The albino panted. His crimson eyes glared about
him. "You would drive me insane, eh? Well, Elric of
Melnibone has witnessed more frightful threats than
this. You will need to do more if you would destroy
his mind!"
And he ran through the whispering passages, looking
to neither his right nor his left, until, quite suddenly,
he had run into blazing daylight and stood
staring down into pale infinity-a blue and endless
void.
He looked up. And he screamed.
Overhead were the gentle hills and dales of a rural
landscape, with rivers, grazing cattle, woods and
cottages. He expected to fall, headlong, but he did
not. He was on the brink of the abyss. The cliff-face
of red sandstone fell immediately below and then
was the tranquil void. He looked back: "Baa-gen . . .
O, Nee Tubbens ..."
A bitter smile played about the albino's bloodless
lips as, decisively, he sheathed his sword.
"Well, then," he said. "Let them do their worst!"
And, laughing, he launched himself over the brink
of the cliff.
5. In Which Werther de Goethe Makes A Wonderful
Discovery
WITH A gesture of quiet pride, Werther de Goethe
indicated his gigantic skull.
"It is very large, Werther," said Mistress Christia,
the Everlasting Concubine, turning a power ring to
adjust the shade of her eyes so that they perfectly
matched the day.
"It is monstrous," said Werther modestly. "It reminds
us all of the Inevitable Night."
"Who was that?" enquired golden-haired Gaf the
Horse in Tears, at present studying ancient legendry.
"Sir Lew Grady?"
"I mean Death," Werther told him, "which overwhelms
us all."
"Well, not us," pointed out the Duke of Queens,
as usual a trifle literal minded. "Because we're immortal,
as you know."
Werther offered him a sad, pitying look and sighed
briefly. "Retain your delusions, if you will."
Mistress Christia stroked the gloomy Werther's
long, dark locks. "There, there," she said. "We have
compensations, Werther."
"Without Death," intoned the Last Romantic, "there
is no point to Life."
As usual, they could not follow him, but they
nodded gravely and politely.
"The skull," continued Werther, stroking the side
of his aircar (which was in the shape of a large flying
reptile) to make it circle and head for the left eyesocket,
"is a Symbol not only of our Morality, but
also of our Fruitless Ambitions."
"Fruit?" Bishop Castle, drowsing at the rear of the
vehicle, became interested. His hobby was currently
orchards. "Less? My pine-trees, you know, are proving
a problem. The apples are much smaller than I
was led to believe."
"The skull is lovely," said Mistress Christia with
valiant enthusiasm. "Well, now that we have seen
it. . ."
"The outward shell," Werther told her. "It is what
it hides which is more important. Man's Foolish
Yearnings are all encompassed therein. His Greed,
his Need for the Impossible, the Heat of his Passions,
the Coldness which must Finally Overtake
him. Through this eye-socket you will encounter a
little invention of my own called The Bargain Basement
of the Mind ..."
He broke off in astonishment.
On the top edge of the eye-socket a tiny figure
had emerged.
"What's that?" enquired the Duke of Queens, craning
his head back. "A random thought?"
"It is not mine at all!"
The figure launched itself into the sky and seemed
to fly, with flailing limbs, towards the sun.
Werther frowned, watching the tiny man disappear.
"The gravity field is reversed there," he said
absently, "in order to make the most of the paradox,
you understand. There is a snowscape, a desert..."
But he was much more interested in the newcomer.
"How do you think he got into my skull?"
"At least he's enjoying himself. He seems to be
laughing," Mistress Christia bent an ear towards the
thin sound, which grew fainter and fainter at first,
but became louder again. "He's coming back."
Werther nodded. "Yes. The field's no longer reversed."
He touched a power ring.
The laughter stopped and became a yell of rage.
The figure hurtled down on them. It had a sword in
one white hand and its red eyes blazed.
Hastily, Werther stroked another ring. The stranger
tumbled into the bottom of the aircar and lay there
panting, cursing and groaning.
"How wonderful!" cried Werther. "Oh, this is a
traveller from some rich, romantic past. Look at him!
What else could he be? What a prize!"
The stranger rose to his feet and raised the sword
high above his head, defying the amazed and delighted
passengers as he screamed at the top of his
voice:
"Heegeegrowinaz!"
"Good afternoon," said Mistress Christia. She
reached in her purse for a translation pill and found
one. "I wonder if you would care to swallow thisit's
quite harmless ..."
"Yakooom, oom glallio," said the albino contemptuously.
"Aha," said Mistress Christia. "Well, just as you
please."
The Duke of Queens pointed towards the other
socket. A huge, whirring beetle came sailing from it.
In its back was someone he recognised with pleasure.
"Mrs. Persson!"
Una brought her aircar alongside.
"Is he in your charge?" asked Werther with
undisguised disappointment. "If so, I could offer
you . . ."
"I'm afraid he means a lot to me," she said.
"From your own age?" Mistress Christia also
recognised Una. She still offered the translation pill
in the palm of her hand. "He seems a mite suspicious
of us."
"I'd noticed," said Una. "It would be useful if he
would accept the pill. However, if he will not, one of
us . . ."
"I would be happy," offered the generous Duke of
Queens. He tugged at his green and gold beard.
"Werther de Goethe, Mrs. Persson."
"Perhaps I had better," said Una nodding to
Werther. The only problem with translation pills was
that they did their job so thoroughly. You could
speak the language perfectly, but you could speak
no other.
Werther was, for once, positive. "Let's all take a
pill," he suggested.
Everyone at the End of Time carried translation
pills, in case of meeting a visitor from Space or the
Past.
Mistress Christia handed hers to Una and found
another. They swallowed.
"Creatures of Chaos," said the newcomer with
cool dignity, "I demand that you release me. You
cannot hold a mortal in this way, not unless he has
struck a bargain with you. And no bargain was struck
which would bring me to the Realm of Chaos."
"It's actually more orderly than you'd think," said
Werther apologetically. "Your first experience, you
see, was the world of my skull, which was deliberately
muddled. I meant to show what Confusion
was the Mind of Man ..."
"May I introduce Mistress Christia, the Everlasting
Concubine," said the Duke of Queens, on his
best manners. "This is Mrs. Persson, Bishop Castle,
Gaf the Horse in Tears. Werther de Goethe-your
unwitting host-and I am the Duke of Queens. We
welcome you to our world. Your name, sir ... ?"
"You must know me, my lord duke," said Elric.
"For I am Elric of Melnibone, Emperor by Right of
Birth, Inheritor of the Ruby Throne, Bearer of the
Actorios, Wielder of the Black Sword ..."
"Indeed!" said Werther de Goethe. In a whispered
aside to Mrs. Persson: "What a marvellous scowl!
What a noble sneer!"
"You are an important personage in your world,
then?" said Mistress Christia, fluttering the eyelashes
she had just extended by half an inch. "Perhaps you
would allow me ..."
"I think he wishes to be returned to his home,"
said Mrs. Persson hastily.
"Returned?" Werther was astonished. "But the
Morphail Effect! It is impossible."
"Not in this case, I think," she said. "For if he is
not returned there is no telling the fluctuations which
will take place throughout the dimensions ..."
They could not follow her, but they accepted her
tone.
"Aye," said Elric darkly, "return me to my realm,
so that I may fulfill my own doom-laden destiny ..."
Werther looked upon the albino with affectionate
delight. "Aha! A fellow spirit! I, too, have a doomladen
destiny."
"I doubt it is as doom-laden as mine." Elric peered
moodily back at the skull as the two aircars fled
away towards a gentle horizon where exotic trees
bloomed.
"Well," said Werther with an effort, "perhaps it is
not, though I assure you ..."
"I have looked upon hell-born horror," said Elric,
"and communicated with the very Gods of the Uttermost
Darkness. I have seen things which would
turn other men's minds to useless jelly . . ."
"Jelly?" interrupted Bishop Castle. "Do you, in
your turn, have any expertise with, for instance,
blackbird trees?"
"Your words are meaningless," Elric told him,
glowering. "Why do you torment me so, my lords? I
did not ask to visit your world. I belong in the world
of men, in the Young Kingdoms, where I seek my
weird. Why, I have but lately experienced adventures
..."
"I do think we have one of those bores," murmured
Bishop Castle to the Duke of Queens, "so
common amongst time-travellers. They all believe
themselves unique."
But the Duke of Queens refused to be drawn. He
had developed a liking for the frowning albino. Gaf
the Horse in Tears was also plainly impressed, for
he had fashioned his own features into a rough
likeness of Elric's. The Prince of Melnibone pretended
insouciance, but it was evident to Una that he was
frightened. She tried to calm him.
"People here at the End of Time . . ." she began.
"No soft words, my lady." A cynical smile played
about the albino's lips. "I know you for that great
unholy temptress, Queen of the Swords, Xiombarg
herself."
"I assure you, I am as human as you, sir . . ."
"Human? I, human? I am not human, madamthough
I be a mortal, 'tis true. I am of older blood,
the blood of the Bright Empire itself, the blood of
R'lin K'ren A'a which Cran Liret mocked, not understanding
what it was he laughed at. Aye, though
forced to summon aid from Chaos, I made no bargain
to become a slave in your realm ..."
"I assure you-um-your majesty," said Una, "that
we had not meant to insult you and your presence
here was no doing of ours. I am, as it happens, a
stranger here myself. I came especially to see you, to
help you escape ..."
"Ha!" said the albino. "I have heard such words
before. You would lure me into some worse trap
than this. Tell me, where is Duke Arioch? He, at
least, I owe some allegiance to."
"We have no one of that name," apologised Mistress
Christia. She enquired of Gaf, who knew everyone.
"No time-traveller?"
"None," Gaf studied Elric's eyes and made a small
adjustment to his own. He sat back, satisfied.
Elric shuddered and turned away mumbling.
"You are very welcome here," said Werther. "I
cannot tell you how glad I am to meet one as essentially
morbid and self-pitying as myself!"
Elric did not seem flattered.
"What can we do to make you feel at home?"
asked Mistress Christia. She had changed her hair to
a rather glossy blue in the hope, perhaps, that Elric
would find it more attractive. "Is there anything you
need?"
"Need? Aye. Peace of mind. Knowledge of my
true destiny. A quiet place where I can be with
Cymoril, whom I love."
"What does this Cymoril look like?" Mistress
Christia became just a trifle over-eager.
"She is the most beautiful creature in the universe,"
said Elric.
"It isn't very much to go on," said Mistress Christia.
"If you could imagine a picture, perhaps? There are
devices in the old cities which could visualise your
thoughts. We could go there. I should be happy to
fill in for her, as it were ..."
"What? You offer me a simulacrum? Do you not
think I should detect such witchery at once? Ah, this
is loathsome! Slay me, if you will, or continue the
torment. I'll listen no longer!"
They were floating now, between high cliffs. On a
ledge far below a group of time-travellers pointed up
at them. One waved desperately.
"You've offended him, Mistress Christia," said
Werther pettishly. "You don't understand how sensitive
he is."
"Yes I do." She was aggrieved. "I was only being
sympathetic."
"Sympathy!" Elric rubbed at his long, somewhat
pointed jaw. "Ha! What do I want with sympathy?"
"I never heard anyone who wanted it more." Mistress
Christia was kind. "You're like a little boy,
really, aren't you?"
"Compared to the ancient Lords of Chaos, I am a
child, aye. But my blood is old and cold, the blood
of decaying Melnibone, as well you know." And
with a huge sigh the albino seated himself at the far
end of the car and rested his head on his fist. "Well?
What is your pleasure, my lords and ladies of Hell?"
"It is your pleasure we are anxious to achieve,"
Werther told him. "Is there anything at all we can
do? Some environment we can manufacture? What
are you used to?"
"Used to? I am used to the crack of leathery dragon
wings in the sweet, sharp air of the early dawn. I am
used to the sound of red battle, the drumming of
hooves on bloody earth, the screams of the dying,
the yells of the victorious. I am used to warring
against demons and monsters, sorcerers and ghouls.
I have sailed on magic ships and fought hand to
hand with reptilian savages. I have encountered the
Jade Man himself. I have fought side by side with
the elementals, who are my allies. I have battled
black evil . . ."
"Well," said Werther, "that's something to go on,
at any rate. I'm sure we can . . ."
"Lord Elric won't be staying," began Una Persson
politely. "You see-these fluctuations in the megaflow-not
to mention his own destiny ... He should
not be here, at all, Werther."
"Nonsense!" Werther flung a black velvet arm about
the stiff shoulders of his new friend. "It is evident
that our destinies are one. Lord Elric is as griefhaunted
as myself!"
"How can you know what it is to be haunted by
grief . . . ?" murmured the albino. His face was halfburied
in Werther's generous sleeve.
Mrs. Persson controlled herself. She rose from
Werther's aircar and made for her own. "Well," she
said, "I must be off. I hope to see you later,
everybody."
They sang out their farewells.
Una Persson turned her beetle westward, towards
Castle Canaria, the home of her old friend Lord
Jagged.
She needed help and advice.
6. In Which Elric of Melnibone Resists the Temptations of
the Chaos Lords
ELRIC REFLECTED on the subtle way in which laughing
Lords of Chaos had captured him. Apparently, he
was merely a guest and quite free to wander where
he would in their Realm. Actually, he was in their
power as much as if they had chained him, for he
could not flee this flying dragon and they had already
demonstrated their enormous magical gifts in
subtle ways, primarily with their shapechanging. Only
the one who called himself Werther de Goethe (plainly
a leader in the hierarchy of Chaos) still had the face
and clothing he had worn when first encountered.
It was evident that this realm obeyed no natural
laws, that it was mutable according to the whims of
its powerful inhabitants. They could destroy him
with a breath and had, subtly enough, given him
evidence of that fact. How could he possibly escape
such danger? By calling upon the Lords of Law for
aid? But he owed them no loyalty and they, doubtless,
regarded him as their enemy. But if he were to
transfer his allegiance to Law . . .
These thoughts and more continued to engage
him, while his captors chatted easily in the ancient
High Speech of Melnibone, itself a version of the
very language of Chaos. It was one of the other
ways in which they revealed themselves for what
they were. He fingered his runesword, wondering if
it would be possible to slay such a lord and steal his
energy, giving himself enough power for a little while
to hurl himself back to his own sphere . . .
The one called Lord Werther was leaning over the
side of the beast-vessel. "Oh, come and see, Elric.
Look!"
Reluctantly, the albino moved to where Werther
peered and pointed.
The entire landscape was filled with a monstrous
battle. Creatures of all kinds and all combinations
tore at one another with huge teeth and claws. Shapeless
things slithered and hopped; giants, naked but
for helmets and greaves, slashed at these beasts with
great broadswords and axes, but were borne down.
Flame and black smoke drifted everywhere. There
was a smell. The stink of blood?
"What do you miss most?" asked the female. She
pressed a soft body against him. He pretended not
to be aware of it. He knew what magic flesh could
hide on a she-witch.
"I miss peace," said Elric almost to himself, "and I
miss war. For in battle I find a kind of peace ..."
"Very good!" Bishop Castle applauded. "You are
beginning to learn our ways. You will soon become
one of our best conversationalists."
Elric touched the hilt of Stormbringer, hoping to
feel it grow warm and vibrant under his hand, but it
was still, impotent in the Realm of Chaos. He uttered
a heavy sigh.
"You are an adventurer, then, in your own world?"
said the Duke of Queens. He was bluff. He had
changed his beard to an ordinary sort of black and
was wearing a scarlet costume; quilted doublet and
tight-fitting hose, with a blue and white ruff, an
elaborately feathered hat on his head. "I, too, am
something of a vagabond. As far, of course, as it is
possible to be here. A buccaneer, of sorts. That is,
my actions are in the main bolder than those of my
fellows. More spectacular. Vulgar. Like yourself, sir.
I admire your costume."
Elric knew that this Duke of Hell was referring to
the fact that he affected the costume of the southern
barbarian, that he did not wear the more restrained
colours and more cleverly wrought silks and metals
of his own folk. He gave tit for tat at this time. He
bowed.
"Thank you, sir. Your own clothes rival mine."
"Do you think so?" The hell-lord pretended pleasure.
If Elric had not known better, the creature
would seem to be swelling with pride.
"Look!" cried Werther again. "Look, Lord Elricwe
are attacked."
Elric whirled.
From below were rising oddly-wrought vesselssomething
like ships, but with huge round wheels at
their sides, like the wheels of water-clocks he had
seen once in Pikarayd. Coloured smoke issued from
chimneys mounted on their decks which swarmed
with huge birds dressed in human clothing. The
birds had multi-coloured plumage, curved beaks, and
they held swords in their claws, while on their heads
were strangely shaped black hats on which were
blazed skulls with crossed bones beneath.
"Heave to!" squawked the birds. "Or we'll put a
shot across your bowels!"
"What can they be?" cried Bishop Castle.
"Parrots," said Werther de Goethe soberly. "Otherwise
known as the hawks of the sea. And they
mean us no good."
Mistress Christia blinked.
"Don't you mean pirates, dear?"
Elric took a firm grip on his sword. Some of the
words the Chaos Lords used were absolutely meaningless
to him. But whether the attacking creatures
were of their own conception, or whether they were
true enemies of his captors, Elric prepared to do
bloody battle. His spirits improved. At least here
was something substantial to fight.
7. In Which Mrs. Persson Becomes Anxious About the Future
of the Universe
LORD JAGGED of Canaria was nowhere to be found.
His huge castle, of gold and yellow spires, an
embellished replica of Kings Cross station, was populated
entirely by his quaint robots, whom Jagged
found at once more mysterious and more trustworthy
than android or human servants, for they could
answer only according to a limited programme.
Una suspected that Jagged was, himself, upon
some mission, for he, too, was a member of the
League of Temporal Adventures. But she needed
aid. Somehow she had to return Elric to his own
dimensions without creating further disruptions in
the fabric of Time and Space. The Conjunction was
not due yet and, if things got any worse, might
never come. So many plans depended on the Conjunction
of the Million Spheres that she could not
risk its failure. But she could not reveal too much
either to Elric or his hosts. As a Guild member she
was sworn to the utmost and indeed necessary secrecy.
Even here at the End of Time there were
certain laws which could be disobeyed only at
enormous risk. Words alone were dangerous when
they described ideas concerning the nature of Time.
She racked her brains. She considered seeking out
Jherek Carnelian, but then remembered that he had
scarcely begun to understand his own destiny. Besides,
there were certain similarities between Jherek
and Elric which she could only sense at present. It
would be best to go cautiously there.
She decided that she had no choice. She must
return to the Time Centre and see if they could
detect Lord Jagged for her.
She brought the necessary co-ordinates together in
her mind and concentrated. For a moment all memories,
all sense of identity left her.
Sergeant Alvarez was beside himself. His screens
were no longer completely without form. Instead,
peculiar shapes could be seen in the arrangements of
lines. Una thought she saw faces, beasts, landscapes.
That had never occurred before. The instruments, at
least, had remained sane, even as they recorded
insanity.
"It's getting worse," said Alvarez. "You've hardly
any Time left. What there is, I've managed to borrow
for you. Did you contact the rogue?"
She nodded. "Yes. But getting him to return ... I
want you to find Jagged."
"Jagged? Are you sure?"
"It's our only chance, I think."
Alvarez sighed and bent a tense back over his
controls.
8. In Which Elric and Werther Fight Side By Side Against
Almost Overwhelming Odds
SOMEWHERE, IT seemed to Elric, as he parried and
thrust at the attacking bird-monsters, rich and rousing
music played. It must be a delusion, brought on
by battle-madness. Blood and feathers covered the
carriage. He saw the one called Christia carried
off screaming. Bishop Castle had disappeared. Gaf
had gone. Only the three of them, shoulder to shoulder,
continued to fight. What was disconcerting to
Elric was that Werther and the Duke of Queens bore
swords absolutely identical to Stormbringer. Perhaps
they were the legendary Brothers of the Black Sword,
said to reside in Chaos?
He was forced to admit to himself that he experienced
a sense of comradeship with these two, who
were braver than most in defending themselves
against such dreadful, unlikely monsters-perhaps
some creation of their own which had turned against
them.
Having captured the Lady Christia, the birds began
to return to their own craft.
"We must rescue her!" cried Werther as the flying
ships began to retreat. "Quickly! In pursuit!"
"Should we not seek reinforcements?" asked Elric,
further impressed by the courage of this Chaos Lord.
"No time!" cried the Duke of Queens. "After them!"
Werther shouted to his vessel. "Follow those ships!"
The vessel did not move.
"It has an enchantment on it," said Werther. "We
are stranded! Ah, and I loved her so much!"
Elric became suspicious again. Werther had shown
no signs, previously, of any affection for the female.
"You loved her?"
"From a distance," Werther explained. "Duke of
Queens, what can we do? Those parrots will ransom
her savagely and mishandle her objects of virtue!"
"Dastardly poltroons!" roared the huge duke.
Elric could make little sense of this exchange. It
dawned on him, then, that he could still hear the
rousing music. He looked below. On some sort of
dais in the middle of the bizarre landscape a large
group of musicians was assembled. They played on,
apparently oblivious of what happened above. This
was truly a world dominated by Chaos.
Their ship began slowly to fall towards the band.
It lurched. Elric gasped and clung to the side as they
struck yielding ground and bumped to a halt.
The Duke of Queens, apparently elated, was already
scrambling overboard. "There! We can follow
on those mounts."
Tethered near the dais was a herd of creatures
bearing some slight resemblance to horses but in a
variety of dazzling, metallic colours, with horns and
bony ridges on their backs. Saddles and bridles of
alien workmanship showed that they were domestic
beasts, doubtless belonging to the musicians.
"They will want some payment from us, surely,"
said Elric, as they hurried towards the horses.
"Ah, true!" Werther reached into a purse at his
belt and drew forth a handful of jewels. Casually he
flung them towards the musicians and climbed into
the saddle of the nearest beast. Elric and the Duke of
Queens followed his example. Then Werther, with a
whoop, was off in the direction in which the birdmonsters
had gone.
The landscape of this world of Chaos changed
rapidly as they rode. They galloped through forests
of crystalline trees, over fields of glowing flowers,
leapt rivers the colour of blood and the consistency
of mercury, and their tireless mounts maintained a
headlong pace which never faltered. Through clouds
of boiling gas which wept, through rain, through
snow, through intolerable heat, through shallow lakes
in which oddly fashioned fish wriggled and gasped,
until at last a range of mountains came in sight.
"There!" panted Werther, pointing with his own
runesword. "Their lair. Oh, the fiends! How can we
climb such smooth cliffs?"
It was true that the base of the cliffs rose some
hundred feet before they became suddenly ragged,
like the rotting teeth of the beggars of Nadsokor.
They were of dusky, purple obsidian and so smooth
as to reflect the faces of the three adventurers who
stared at them in despair.
It was Elric who saw the steps cut into the side of
the cliff.
"These will take us up some of the way, at least."
"It could be a trap," said the Duke of Queens. He,
too, seemed to be relishing the opportunity to take
action. Although a Lord of Chaos there was something
about him that made Elric respond to a fellow
spirit.
"Let them trap us," said Elric laconically. "We
have our swords."
With a wild laugh, Werther de Goethe was the
first to swing himself from his saddle and run towards
the steps, leaping up them almost as if he had the
power of flight. Elric and the Duke of Queens followed
more slowly.
Their feet slipping in the narrow spaces not meant
for mortals to climb, ever aware of the dizzying drop
on their left, the three came at last to the top of the
cliff and stood clinging to sharp crags, staring across
a plain at a crazy castle rising into the clouds before
them.
"Their stronghold," said Werther.
"What are these creatures?" Elric asked. "Why do
they attack you? Why do they capture the Lady
Christia?"
"They nurse an abiding hatred for us," explained
the Duke of Queens, and looked expectantly at
Werther, who added:
"This was their world before it became ours."
"And before it became theirs," said the Duke of
Queens, "it was the world of the Yargtroon."
"The Yargtroon?" Elric frowned.
"They dispossessed the bodiless vampire goat-folk
of Kia," explained Werther. "Who, in turn, destroyedor
thought they destroyed-the Grash-Tu-Xem, a
race of Old Ones older than any Old Ones except
the Elder Old Ones of Ancient Thriss."
"Older even than Chaos?" asked Elric.
"Oh, far older," said Werther.
"It's almost completely collapsed, it's so old," added
the Duke of Queens.
Elric was baffled. "Thriss?"
"Chaos," said the duke.
Elric let a thin smile play about his lips. "You still
mock me, my lord. The power of Chaos is the greatest
there is, only equalled by the power of Law."
"Oh, certainly," agreed the Duke of Queens.
Elric became suspicious again. "Do you play with
me, my lord?"
"Well, naturally, we try to please our guests ..."
Werther interrupted. "Yonder doomy edifice holds
the one I love. Somewhere within its walls she is
incarcerated, while ghouls taunt at her and devils
threaten."
"The bird-monsters,. . .?" began Elric.
"Chimerae," said the Duke of Queens. "You saw
only one of the shapes they assume."
Elric understood this. "Aha!"
"But how can we enter it?" Werther spoke almost
to himself.
"We must wait until nightfall," said Elric, "and
enter under the cover of darkness."
"Nightfall?" Werther brightened.
Suddenly they were in utter darkness.
Somewhere the Duke of Queens lost his footing
and fell with a muffled curse.
9. In Which Mrs. Persson At Last Makes Contact With
Her Old Friend
THEY STOOD together beneath the striped awning of
the tent while a short distance away armoured men,
mounted on armoured horses, jousted, were injured
or died. The two members wore appropriate costumes
for the period. Lord Jagged looked handsome
in his surcoat and mail, but Una Persson merely
looked uncomfortable in her wimple and kirtle.
"I can't leave just now," he was saying. "I am
laying the foundations for a very important development."
"Which will come to nothing unless Elric is returned,"
she said.
A knight with a broken lance thundered past,
covering them in dust.
"Well played Sir Holger!" called Lord Jagged. "An
ancestor of mine, you know," he told her.
"You will not be able to recognise the world of the
End of Time when you return, if this is allowed to
continue," she said.
"It's always difficult, isn't it?" But he was listening
to her now.
"These disruptions could as easily affect us and
leave us stranded," she added. "We would lose any
freedom we have gained."
He bit into a pomegranate and offered it to her.
"You can only get these in this area. Did you know?
Impossible to find in England. In the thirteenth century,
at any rate. The idea of freedom is such a
nebulous one, isn't it? Most of the time when angry
people are speaking of 'freedom' what they are actually
asking for is much simpler-respect. Do those in
authority or those with power ever really respect
those who do not have power?" He paused. "Or do
they mean 'power' and not 'freedom.' Or are they
the same . . .?"
"Really, Jagged, this is no time for self-indulgence."
He looked about him. "There's little else to do in
the Middle East in the thirteenth century, I assure
you, except eat pomegranates and philosophise . . ."
"You must come back to the End of Time."
He wiped his handsome chin. "Your urgency," he
said, "worries me, Una. These matters should be
handled with delicacy-slowly ..."
"The entire fabric will collapse unless he is returned
to his own dimension. He is an important
factor in the whole plan."
"Well, yes, I understand that."
"He is, in one sense at least, your protege."
"I know. But not my responsibility."
"You must help," she said.
There was a loud bang and a crash.
A splinter flew into Mrs. Persson's eye.
"Oh, zounds!" she said.
10. In Which The Castle Is Assaulted And The Plot
Thickened
A MOON had appeared above the spires of the castle
which seemed to Elric to have changed its shape
since he had first seen it. He meant to ask his com-
panions for an explanation, but at present they were
all sworn to silence as they crept nearer. From within
the castle burst light, emanating from guttering brands
stuck into brackets on the walls. There was laughter,
noise of feasting. Hidden behind a rock they peered
through one large window and inspected the scene
within.
The entire hall was full of men wearing identical
costumes. They had black skull caps, loose white
blouses and trousers, black shoes. Their eyebrows
were black in dead white faces, even paler than
Elric's and they had bright red lips.
"Aha," whispered Werther, "the parrots are celebrating
their victory. Soon they will be too drunk to
know what is happening to them."
"Parrots?" said Elric. "What is that word?"
"Pierrots, he means," said the Duke of Queens.
"Don't you, Werther?" There were evidently certain
words which did not translate easily into the High
Speech of Melnibone.
"Sshh," said the Last Romantic, "they will capture
us and torture us to death if they detect our presence."
They worked their way around the castle. It was
guarded at intervals by gigantic warriors whom Elric
at first mistook for statues, save that, when he looked
closely, he could see them breathing very slowly.
They were unarmed, but their fists and feet were
disproportionately large and could crush any intruder
they detected.
"They are sluggish, by the look of them," said
Elric. "If we are quick, we can run beneath them and
enter the castle before they realise it. Let me try first.
If I succeed, you follow."
Werther clapped his new comrade on the back.
"Very well."
Elric waited until the nearest guard halted and
spread his huge feet apart, then he dashed forward,
settling like an insect between the giant's legs and
flinging himself through a dimly lit window. He
found himself in some sort of storeroom. He had not
been seen, though the guard cocked his ear for half
a moment before resuming his pace.
Elric looked cautiously out and signalled to his
companions. The Duke of Queens waited for the
guard to stop again, then he, too, made for the
window and joined Elric. He was panting and grinning.
"This is wonderful," he said.
Elric admired his spirit. There was no doubt that
the guard could crush any of them to a pulp, even
if (as still nagged at his brain) this was all some sort
of complicated illusion.
Another dash, and Werther was with them.
Cautiously, Elric opened the door of the storeroom.
They looked onto a deserted landing. They
crossed the landing and looked over a balustrade.
They had expected to see another hall, but instead
there was a miniature lake on which floated the
most beautiful miniature ship, all mother-of-pearl,
brass and ebony, with golden sails and silver masts.
Surrounding this ship were mermaids and mermen
bearing trays of exotic food (reminding Elric how
hungry he still was) which they fed to the ship's
only passenger, Mistress Christia.
"She is under an enchantment," said Elric. "They
beguile her with illusions so that she will not wish to
come with us even if we do rescue her. Do you
know no counter-spells?"
Werther thought for a moment. Then he shook his
head.
"You must be very minor Lords of Chaos," said
Elric, biting his lower lip.
From the lake, Mistress Christia giggled and drew
one of the mermaids towards her. "Come here, my
pretty piscine!"
"Mistress Christia!" hissed Werther de Goethe.
"Oh!" The captive widened her eyes (which were
now both large and blue). "At last!"
"You wish to be rescued?" said Elric.
"Rescued? Only by you, most alluring of albinoes!"
Elric hardened his features. "I am not the one who
loves you, madam."
"What? I am loved? By whom? By you, Duke of
Queens?"
"Sshh," said Elric. "The demons will hear us."
"Oh, of course," said Mistress Christia gravely,
and fell silent for a second. "I'll get rid of all this,
shall I?"
And she touched one of her rings.
Ship, lake and merfolk were gone. She lay on
silken cushions, attended by monkeys.
"Sorcery!" said Elric. "If she has such power, then
why-?"
"It is limited," explained Werther. "Merely to such
tricks."
"Quite," said Mistress Christia.
Elric glared at them. "You surround me with illusions.
You make me think I am aiding you, when
really ..."
"No, no!" cried Werther. "I assure you, Lord Elric,
you have our greatest respect-well, mine at least-we
are only attempting to-"
There was a roar from the gallery above. Rank
upon rank of grinning demons looked down upon
them. They were armed to the teeth.
"Hurry!" The Duke of Queens leapt to the cushions
and seized Mistress Christia, flinging her over
his shoulder. "We can never defeat so many!"
The demons were already rushing down the circular
staircase. Elric, still not certain whether his new
friends deceived him or not, made a decision. He
called to the Duke of Queens. "Get her from the
castle. We'll keep them from you for a few moments,
at least." He could not help himself. He
behaved impulsively.
The Duke of Queens, sword in one hand, Mistress
Christia over the other shoulder, ran into a narrow
passage. Elric and Werther stood together as the
demons rushed down on them. Blade met blade.
There was an unbearable shrilling of steel mingled
with the cacklings and shrieks of the demons as they
gnashed their teeth and rolled their eyes and slashed
at the pair with swords, knives and axes. But worst
of all was the smell. The dreadful smell of burning
flesh which filled the air and threatened to choke
Elric. It came from the demons. The smell of Hell.
He did his best to cover his nostrils as he fought,
certain that the smell must overwhelm him before
the swords. Above him was a set of metal rungs
fixed into the stones, leading high into a kind of a
chimney. As a pause came he pointed upward to
Werther, who understood him. For a moment they
managed to drive the demons back. Werther jumped
onto Elric's shoulders (again displaying a strange
lightness) and reached down to haul the albino after
him.
While the demons wailed and cackled below, they
began to climb the chimney.
They climbed for nearly fifty feet before they found
themselves in a small, round room whose windows
looked out over the purple crags and, beyond them,
to a scene of bleak rocky pavements pitted with
holes, like some vast unlikely cheese.
And there, rolling over this relatively flat landscape,
in full daylight (for the sun had risen) was the
Duke of Queens in a carriage of brass and wood,
studded with jewels, and drawn by two bovine creatures
which looked to Elric as if they might be the
fabulous oxen of mythology who had drawn the
warchariot of his ancestors to do battle with the
emerging nations of mankind.
Mistress Christia was beside the Duke of Queens.
They seemed to be waiting for Elric and Werther.
"It's impossible," said the albino. "We could not
get out of this tower, let alone those crags. I wonder
how they managed to move so quickly and so far.
And where did the chariot itself come from?"
"Stolen, no doubt, from the demons," said Werther.
"See, there are wings here." He indicated a heap of
feathers in the corner of the room. "We can use
those."
"What wizardry is this?" said Elric. "Man cannot
fly on bird wings."
''With the appropriate spell he can," said Werther.
"I am not that well versed in the magic arts, of
course, but let me see ..." He picked up one set of
wings. They were soft and glinted with subtle, rainbow
colours. He placed them on Elric's back, murmuring
his spell:
Oh, for the wings, for the wings of a dove,
To carry me to the one 1 love . . .
"There!" He was very pleased with himself. Elric
moved his shoulders and his wings began to flap.
"Excellent! Off you go, Elric. I'll join you in a
moment."
Elric hesitated, then saw the head of the first demon
emerging from the hole in the floor. He jumped
to the window ledge and leapt into space. The wings
sustained him. Against all logic he flew smoothly
towards the waiting chariot and behind him, came
Werther de Goethe. At the windows of the tower
the demons crowded, shaking fists and weapons as
their prey escaped them.
Elric landed rather awkwardly beside the chariot
and was helped aboard by the Duke of Queens.
Werther joined them, dropping expertly amongst
them. He removed the wings from the albino's back
and nodded to the Duke of Queens who yelled at
the oxen, cracking his whip as they began to move.
Mistress Christia flung her arms about Elric's neck.
"What courage! What resourcefulness!" she breathed.
"Without you, I should now be ruined!"
Elric sheathed Stormbringer. "We all three worked
together for your rescue, madam." Gently he removed
her arms. Courteously he bowed and leaned
against the far side of the chariot as it bumped and
hurtled over the peculiar rocky surface.
"Swifter! Swifter!" called the Duke of Queens casting
urgent looks backward. "We are followed!"
From the disappearing tower there now poured a
host of flying, gibbering things. Once again the creatures
had changed shape and had assumed the form
of striped, winged cats, all glaring eyes, fangs and
extended claws.
The rock became viscous, clogging the wheels of
the chariot, as they reached what appeared to be a
silvery road, flowing between the high trees of an
alien forest already touched by a weird twilight.
The first of the flying cats caught up with them,
slashing.
Elric drew Stormbringer and cut back. The beast
roared in pain, blood streaming from its severed leg,
its wings flapping in Elric's face as it hovered and
attempted to snap at the sword.
The chariot rolled faster, through the forest to
green fields touched by the moon. The days were
short, it seemed, in this part of Chaos. A path
stretched skyward. The Duke of Queens drove the
chariot straight up it, heading for the moon itself.
The moon grew larger and larger and still the
demons pursued them, but they could not fly as fast
as the chariot which went so swiftly that sorcery
must surely speed it. Now they could only be heard
in the darkness behind and the silver moon was
huge.
"There!" called Werther. "There is safety!"
On they raced until the moon was reached, the
oxen leaping in their traces, galloping over the gleaming
surface to where a white palace awaited them.
"Sanctuary," said the Duke of Queens. And he
laughed a wild, full laugh of sheer joy.
The palace was like ivory, carved and wrought by
a million hands, every inch covered with delicate
designs.
Elric wondered. "Where is this place?" he asked.
"Does it lie outside the Realm of Chaos?"
Werther seemed non-plussed. "You mean our
world?"
"Aye."
"It is still part of our world," said the Duke of
Queens.
"Is the palace to your liking?" asked Werther.
"It is lovely."
"A trifle pale for my own taste," said the Last
Romantic. "It was Mistress Christia's idea."
"You built this?" the albino turned to the woman.
"When?"
"Just now." She seemed surprised.
Elric nodded. "Aha. It is within the power of
Chaos to create whatever whims it pleases."
The chariot crossed a white drawbridge and entered
a white courtyard. In it grew white flowers.
They dismounted and entered a huge hall, white as
bone, in which red lights glowed. Again Elric began
to suspect mockery, but the faces of the Chaos lords
showed only pleasure. He realised that he was dizzy
with hunger and weariness, as he had been ever
since he had been flung into this terrible world where
no shape was constant, no idea permanent.
"Are you hungry?" asked Mistress Christia.
He nodded. And suddenly the room was filled by
a long table on which all kinds of food were heapedand
everything, meats and fruits and vegetables,
was white.
Elric moved to take the seat she indicated and he
put some of the food on a silver plate and he touched
it to his lips and he tasted it. It was delicious. Forgetting
suspicion, he began to eat heartily, trying not to
consider the colourless quality of the meal. Werther
and the Duke of Queens also took some food, but it
seemed they ate only from politeness. Werther
glanced up at the faraway roof. "What a wonderful
tomb this would make," he said. "Your imagination
improves, Mistress Christia."
"Is this your domain?" asked Elric. "The moon?"
"Oh, no," she said. "It was all made for the
occasion."
"Occasion?"
"For your adventure," she said. Then she fell silent.
Elric became grave. "Those demons? They were
not your enemies. They belong to you!"
"Belong?" said Mistress Christia. She shook her
head.
Elric frowned and pushed back his plate. "I am,
however, most certainly your captive." He stood up
and paced the white floor. "Will you not return me
to my own plane?"
"You would come back almost immediately," said
Werther de Goethe. "It is called the Morphail Effect.
And if you did not come here, you would yet remain
in your own future. It is in the nature of Time."
"This is nonsense," said Elric. "I have left my own
realm before and returned-though admittedly memory
becomes weak, as with dreams poorly recalled."
"No man can go back in Time," said the Duke of
Queens. "Ask Brannart Morphail."
"He, too, is a Lord of Chaos?"
"If you like. He is a colleague."
"Could he not return me to my realm? He sounds
a clever being."
"He could not and he would not," said Mistress
Christia. "Haven't you enjoyed your experiences here
so far?"
"Enjoyed?" Elric was astonished. "Madam, I think
. . . Well, what has happened this day is not what
we mortals would call 'enjoyment'!"
"But you seemed to be enjoying yourself," said the
Duke of Queens in some disappointment. "Didn't
he, Werther?"
"You were much more cheerful through the whole
episode," agreed the Last Romantic. "Particularly
when you were fighting the demons."
"As with many time-travellers who suffer from
anxieties," said Mistress Christia, "you appeared to
relax when you had something immediate to capture
your attention ..."
Elric refused to listen. This was clever Chaos talk,
meant to deceive him and take his mind from his
chief concern.
"If I was any help to you," he began, "I am, of
course ..."
"He isn't very grateful," Mistress Christia pouted.
Elric felt madness creeping nearer again. He calmed
himself.
"I thank you for the food, madam. Now, I would
sleep."
"Sleep?" she was disconcerted. "Oh! Of course.
Yes. A bedroom?"
"If you have such a thing."
"As many as you like." She moved a stone on one
of her rings. The walls seemed to draw back to show
bedchamber after bedchamber, in all manner of styles,
with beds of every shape and fashion. Elric controlled
his temper. He bowed, thanked her, said
goodnight to the two lords and made for the nearest
bed.
As he closed the door behind him, he thought he
heard Werther de Goethe say: "We must try to think
of a better entertainment for him when he wakes up."
11. In Which Mrs. Persson Witnesses The First Sign Of
The Megaflow's Disintegration
IN CASTLE CANARIA Lord Jagged unrolled his antique
charts. He had had them drawn for him by a baffled
astrologer in 1590. They were one of his many affec-
tations. At the moment, however, they were of considerably
greater use than Alvarez's electronics.
While he used a wrist computer to check his figures,
Una Persson looked out of the window of
Castle Canaria and wondered who had invented this
particular landscape. A green and orange sun cast
sickening light over the herds of grazing beasts who
resembled, from this distance at any rate, nothing so
much as gigantic human hands. In the middle of the
scene was raised some kind of building in the shape
of a vast helmet, vaguely Greek in conception. Beyond
that was a low, grey moon. She turned away.
"I must admit," said Lord Jagged, "that I had not
understood the extent ..."
"Exactly," she said.
"You must forgive me. A certain amount of
amnesia-euphoria, perhaps?-always comes over
one in these very remote periods."
"Quite."
He looked up from the charts. "We've a few hours
at most."
Her smile was thin, her nod barely perceptible.
While she made the most of having told him so,
Lord Jagged frowned, turned a power ring and produced
an already lit pipe which he placed thoughtfully
in his mouth, taking it out again almost immediately.
"That wasn't Dunhill Standard Medium." He
laid the pipe aside.
There came a loud buzzing noise from the window.
The scene outside was disintegrating as if melting
on glass. An eerie golden light spread everywhere,
flooding from an apex of deeper gold, as if forming a
funnel.
"That's a rupture," said Lord Jagged. His voice
was tense. He put his arm about her shoulders.
"I've never seen anything of the size before."
Rushing towards them along the funnel of light
there came an entire city of turrets and towers and
minarets in a wide variety of pastel colours. It was
set into a saucer-shaped base which was almost certainly
several miles in circumference.
For a moment the city seemed to retreat. The
golden light faded. The city remained, some distance
away, swaying a little as if on a gentle tide, a
couple of thousand feet above the ground, the grey
moon below it.
"That's what I call megaflow distortion," said Una
Persson in that inappropriately facetious tone adopted
by those who are deeply frightened.
"I recognise the period." Jagged drew a telescope
from his robes. "Second Candlemaker's Empire,
mainly based in Arcturus. This is a village by their
standards. After all, Earth was merely a rural park
during that time." He retreated into academe, his
own response to fear.
Una craned her head. "Isn't that some sort of
vehicle heading towards the city. From the moongood
heavens, they've spotted it already. Are they
going to try to put the whole thing into a menagerie?"
Jagged had the advantage of the telescope. "I think
not." He handed her the instrument.
Through it she saw a scarlet and black chariot
borne by what seemed to be some form of flying
fairground horses. In the chariot, armed to the teeth
with lances, bows, spears, swords, axes, morningstars,
maces and almost every other barbaric hand-weapon,
clad in quasi-mythological armour, were Werther de
Goethe, the Duke of Queens and Elric of Melnibone.
"They're attacking it!" she said faintly. "What will
happen when the two groups intersect?"
"Three groups," he pointed out. "Untangling that
in a few hours is going to be even harder."
"And if we fail?"
He shrugged. "We might just as well give ourselves
up to the biggest chronoquake the universe
has ever experienced."
"You're exaggerating," she said.
"Why not? Everyone else is."
12. The Attack On The Citadel Of The Skies
"MELNIBONE! MELNIBONE"! cried the albino as the chariot
circled over the spires and turrets of the city.
They saw startled faces below. Strange engines were
being dragged through the narrow streets.
"Surrender!" Elric demanded.
"I do not think they can understand us," said the
Duke of Queens. "What a find, eh? A whole city
from the past!"
Werther had been reluctant to embark on an adventure
not of his own creation, but Elric, realising
that here at last was a chance of escape, had been
anxious to begin. The Duke of Queens had, in an
instant, aided the albino by producing costumes,
weapons, transport. Within minutes of the city's appearance,
they had been on their way.
Exactly why Elric wished to attack the city, Werther
could not make out, unless it was some test of the
Melnibonean's to see if his companions were true
allies or merely pretending to have befriended him.
Werther was learning a great deal from Elric, much
more than he had ever learned from Mongrove,
whose ideas of angst were only marginally less notional
than Werther's own.
A broad, flat blue ray beamed from the city. It
singed one wheel of the chariot.
"Ha! They make sorcerous weapons," said Elric.
"Well, my friends. Let us see you counter with your
own power."
Werther obediently imitated the blue ray and sent
it back from his fingers, slicing the tops off several
towers. The Duke of Queens typically let loose a
different coloured ray from each of his extended ten
fingers and bored a hole all the way through the
bottom of the city so that fields could be seen below.
He was pleased with the effect.
"This is the power of the Gods of Chaos!" cried
Elric, a familiar elation filling him as the blood of old
Melnibone was fired. "Surrender!"
"Why do you want them to surrender?" asked the
Duke of Queens in some disappointment.
"Their city evidently has the power to fly through
the dimensions. If I became its lord I can force it to
return to my own plane," said Elric reasonably.
"The Morphail Effect . . ." began Werther, but
realised he was spoiling the spirit of the game.
"Sorry."
The blue ray came again, but puttered out and
faded before it reached them.
"Their power is gone!" cried Elric. "Your sorcery
defeats them, my lords. Let us land and demand
they honour us as their new rulers."
With a sigh, Werther ordered the chariot to set
down in the largest square. Here they waited until a
few of the citizens began to arrive, cautious and
angry, but evidently in no mood to give any further
resistance.
Elric addressed them. "It was necessary to attack
and conquer you, for I must return to my own Realm,
there to fulfill my great destiny. If you will take me
to Melnibone, I will demand nothing further from
you."
"One of us really ought to take a translation pill"
said Werther. "These people probably have no idea
where they are."
A meaningless babble came from the citizens. Elric
frowned. "They understand not the High Speech,"
he said. "I will try the Common Tongue." He spoke
in a language neither Werther, the Duke of Queens
nor the citizens of this settlement could understand.
He began to show signs of frustration. He drew
his sword Stormbringer. "By the Black Sword, know
that I am Elric, last of the royal line of Melnibone!
You must obey me. Is there none here who understands
the High Speech?"
Then, from the crowd, stepped a being far taller
than the others. He was dressed in robes of dark
blue and deepest scarlet and his face was haughty,
beautiful and full of evil.
"I speak the High Tongue," he said.
Werther and the Duke of Queens were non-plussed.
This was no one they recognised.
Elric gestured. "You are the ruler of the city?"
"Call me that, if you will."
"Your name?"
"I am known by many names. And you know me,
Elric of Melnibone, for I am your lord and your
friend."
"Ah," said Elric lowering his sword, "this is the
greatest deception of them all. I am a fool."
"Merely a mortal," said the newcomer, his voice
soft, amused and full of a subtle arrogance. "Are
these the renegades who helped you?"
"Renegades?" said Werther. "Who are you, sir?"
"You should know me, rogue lords. You aid a
mortal and defy your brothers of Chaos."
"Eh?" said the Duke of Queens. "I haven't got a
brother."
The stranger ignored him. "Demigods who thought
that by helping this mortal they could threaten the
power of the Greater Ones."
"So you did aid me against your own," said Elric.
"Oh, my friends!"
"And they shall be punished!"
Werther began: "We regret any damage to your
city. After all, you were not invited ..."
The Duke of Queens was laughing. "Who are
you? What disguise is this?"
"Know me for your master." The eyes of the
stranger glowed with myriad fires. "Know me for
Arioch, Duke of Hell!"
"Arioch!" Elric became filled with a strange joy.
"Arioch! I called upon thee and was not answered!"
"I was not in this Realm," said the Duke of Hell.
"I was forced to be absent. And while I was gone,
fools thought to displace me."
"I really cannot follow all this," said the Duke of
Queens. He set aside his mace. "I must confess I
become a trifle bored, sir. If you will excuse me."
"You will not escape me." Arioch lifted a languid
hand and the Duke of Queens was frozen to the
ground, unable to move anything save his eyes.
"You are interfering, sir, with a perfectly-"
Werther too was struck dumb and paralysed.
But Elric refused to quail. "Lord Arioch, I have
given you blood and souls. You owe me . . ."
"I owe you nothing, Elric of Melnibone. Nothing I
do not choose to owe. You are my slave ..."
"No," said Elric. "I serve you. There are old bonds.
But you cannot control me, Lord Arioch, for I have a
power within me which you fear. It is the power of
my very mortality."
The Duke of Hell shrugged. "You will remain in
the Realm of Chaos forever. Your mortality will avail
you little here."
"You need me in my own Realm, to be your
agent. That, too, I know, Lord Arioch."
The handsome head lowered a fraction as if Arioch
considered this. The beautiful lips smiled. "Aye, Elric.
It is true that I need you to do my work. For the
moment it is impossible for the Lords of Chaos to
interfere directly in the world of mortals, for we
should threaten our own existence. The rate of entropy
would increase beyond even our control. The
day has not yet come when Law and Chaos must
decide the issue once and for all. But it will come
soon enough for you, Elric."
"And my sword will be at your service, Lord
Arioch."
"Will it, Elric?"
Elric was surprised by this doubting tone. He had
always served Chaos, as his ancestors had. "Why
should I turn against you? Law has no attractions for
one such as Elric of Melnibone."
The Duke of Hell was silent.
"And there is the bargain," added Elric. "Return
me to my own Realm, Lord Arioch, so that I might
keep it."
Arioch sighed. "I am reluctant."
"I demand it," bravely said the albino.
"Oho!" Arioch was amused. "Well, mortal, I'll
reward your courage and I'll punish your insolence.
The reward will be that you are returned from whence
you came, before you called on Chaos in your battle
with that pathetic wizard. The punishment is that
you will recall every incident that occurred since
then-but only in your dreams. You will be haunted
by the puzzle for the rest of your life-and you will
never for a moment be able to express what mystifies
you."
Elric smiled. "I am already haunted by a curse of that kind, my lord."
"Be that as it may, I have made my decision."
"I accept it," said the albino, and he sheathed his
sword, Stormbringer.
"Then come with me," said Arioch, Duke of Hell.
And he drifted forward, took Elric by the arm, and
lifted them both high into the sky, floating over
distorted scenes, half-formed dream-worlds, the
whims of the Lords of Chaos, until they came to a
gigantic rock shaped like a skull. And through one
of the eye-sockets Lord Arioch bore Elric of Melnibone.
And down strange corridors that whispered
and displayed all manner of treasures. And up into a
landscape, a desert in which grew many strange
plants, while overhead could be seen a land of snow
and mountains, equally alien. And from his robes
Arioch, Duke of Hell produced a wand and he bade
Elric to take hold of the wand, which was hot to the
touch and glittered, and he placed his own slender
hand at the other end, and he murmured words
which Elric could not understand and together they
began to fade from the landscape, into the darkness
of limbo where many eyes accused them, to
an island in a grey and storm-tossed sea; an island
littered with destruction and with the dead.
Then Arioch, Duke of Hell, laughed a little and
vanished, leaving the Prince of Melnibone sprawled
amongst corpses and ruins while heavy rain beat
down upon him.
And in the scabbard at Elric's side, Stormbringer
stirred and murmured once more.
13. In Which There Is A Small Celebration At The End
Of Time
WERTHER DE GOETHE and the Duke of Queens blinked
their eyes and found that they could move their
heads. They stood in a large, pleasant room full of
charts and ancient instruments. Mistress Christia was
there, too.
Una Persson was smiling as she watched golden
light fade from the sky. The city had disappeared,
hardly any the worse for its experience. She had
managed to save the two friends without a great
deal of fuss, for the citizens had still been bewildered
by what had happened to them. Because of
the megaflow distortion, the Morphail Effect would
not manifest itself. They would never understand
where they had been or what had actually happened.
"Who on earth was that fellow who turned up?"
asked the Duke of Queens. "Some friend of yours,
Mrs. Persson? He's certainly no sportsman."
"Oh, I wouldn't agree. You could call him the
ultimate sportsman," she said. "I am acquainted with
him, as a matter of fact."
"It's not Jagged in disguise is it?" said Mistress
Christia who did not really know what had gone on.
"This is Jagged's castle-but where is Jagged?"
"You are aware how mysterious he is," Una answered.
"I happened to be here when I saw that
Werther and the Duke were in trouble in the city
and was able to be of help."
Werther scowled (a very good copy of Elric's own
scowl). "Well, it isn't good enough."
"It was a jolly adventure while it lasted, you must
admit," said the Duke of Queens.
"It wasn't meant to be jolly," said Werther."It
was meant to be significant."
Lord Jagged entered the room. He wore his familiar
yellow robes. "How pleasant," he said. "When
did all of you arrive?"
"I have been here for some time," Mrs. Persson
explained, "but Werther and the Duke of
Queens ..."
"Just got here," explained the duke. "I hope we're
not intruding. Only we had a slight mishap and Mrs.
Persson was good enough ..."
"Always delighted," said the insincere lord. "Would
you care to see my new-?"
"I'm on my way home," said the Duke of Queens.
"I just stopped by. Mrs. Persson will explain."
"I, too," said Werther suspiciously, "am on my
way back."
"Very well. Goodbye."
Werther summoned an aircar, a restrained figure
of death, in rags with a sickle, who picked the
three up in his hand and bore them towards a bleak
horizon.
It was only days later, when he went to visit
Mongrove to tell him of his adventures and solicit
his friend's advice, that Werther realised he was still
speaking High Melnibonean. Some nagging thought
remained with him for a long while after that. It
concerned Lord Jagged, but he could not quite work
out what was involved.
After this incident there were no further disrup-
tions at the End of Time until the beginning of the
story concerning Jherek Carnelian and Miss Amelia
Underwood.
14. In Which Elric of Melnibone Recovers From a Variety
of Enchantments and Becomes Determined to Return
to the Dreaming City
ELRIC WAS awakened by the rain on his face. Wearily
he peered around him. To left and right there were
only the dismembered corpses of the dead, the Krettii
and the Filkharian sailors destroyed during his battle
with the halfbrute who had somehow gained so
much sorcerous power. He shook his milk-white
hair and he raised crimson eyes to the grey, boiling
sky.
It seemed that Arioch had aided him, after all. The
sorcerer was destroyed and he, Elric, remained alive.
He recalled the sweet, bantering tones of his patron
demon. Familiar tones, yet he could not remember
what the words had been.
He dragged himself over the dead and waded
through the shallows towards the Filkharian ship
which still had some of its crew. They were, by now,
anxious to head out into open sea again rather than
face any more terrors on Sorcerer's Isle.
He was determined to see Cymoril, whom he loved,
to regain his throne from Yyrkoon, his cousin . . .
15. In Which A Brief Reunion Takes Place At the Time
Centre
WITH THE manuscript of Colonel Pyat's rather dangerous
volume of memoirs safely back in her briefcase,
Una Persson decided it was the right moment
to check into the Time Centre. Alvarez should be on
duty again and his instruments should be registering
any minor imbalances resulting from the episode
concerning the gloomy albino.
Alvarez was not alone. Lord Jagged was there, in
a disreputable Norfolk jacket and smoking a battered
briar. He had evidently been holidaying in Victorian
England. He was pleased to see her.
Alvarez ran his gear through all functions. "Sweet
and neat," he said. "It hasn't been as good since
I don't know when. We've you to thank for that,
Mrs. P."
She was modest.
"Certainly not. Jagged was the one. Your disguise
was wonderful, Jagged. How did you manage to
imitate that character so thoroughly? It convinced
Elric. He really thought you were whatever it was-a
Chaos Duke?"
Jagged waved a modest hand.
"I mean," said Una, "it's almost as if you were this
fellow 'Arioch' ..."
But Lord Jagged only puffed on his pipe and smiled
a secret and superior smile.
The Last Enchantment
THROUGH THE blue and hazy night ran a shuddering
man. He clutched terror to him, his bloated eyes full
of blood. First behind him and then seemingly ahead
of him came the hungry chuckles, the high whispered
words.
"Here toothsome. Here sweetmeat."
He swerved in another direction, moaning. Like a
huge husk he was, like a hollow ornament of thin
bone, with his great, rolling head swaying on his
shoulders resembling a captive balloon, the wet cavern
of his wide mouth fully open and gasping, the
yellow spikes of teeth clashing in his head.
Awkwardly he ran, sometimes scuttling like a
wounded spider, something lurching, mooing to himself
through the tall and ancient forest, his feet sinking
into the carpet of wet, pungent bracken and
rotting roots. He held in his hand, that long, white,
metal-coloured claw, a glowing black talisman, held
it out and cried:
"Oh Teshwan-aid me, Teshwan. Aid me ..."
In the sluggish brew that was the contents of his
rolling skull a few words swam to the surface and
seemed to lie there, moving with the tide of his
mind. And the voice which spoke them was sardonic:
"How can Teshwan aid thee, little mortal?"
But this relic of disoriented flesh could not form a
coherent thought; could not answer save to scream
its fear. So Teshwan took his presence away and it
was left to the horseman to find the horror-crazed
man.
Elric of Melnibone heard the voice and recognized
the name. He sensed other, more ominous, denizens
lurking about him in the forest.
Moodily he curled his hands about the reins of his
mount and jerked its head, guiding it in the direction
of the screams. He only casually considered
aiding the man and he rode his horse toward him
more from curiosity than anything. Elric was untroubled
by the terrors that the forest held, regarding
them as another, more normal man might regard
the omnipresent song of birds and the rustle of small
rodents in the undergrowth.
Great tremblings shuddered through Slorg's ruined
body and he still heard the sharp whisperings. Were
they carried on the air or were they slithering about
in his jellied brain?
He gasped as he turned and saw the white-faced
horseman riding like a grim, handsome god into the
moon-glazed glade.
The horseman's long, sharply delineated skull was
leperwhite, as if stripped of flesh, and his slightly
slanting eyes gleamed crimson. He wore a jerkin of
black velvet caught at the throat by a thin silver
chain. His britches, too, were of black cloth, and his
leather boots were high and shining. Over his shoulders
was a high-collared cape of scarlet and a heavy
longsword slapped at his side as he pulled his steed
to a standstill. His long, flowing hair was as white as
his face. The horseman was an albino.
The shock of confronting this new and more tangible
figure jerked Slorg back into half-sanity and broken
words sidled from his lips.
"Who are you? Aid me! I beg you, aid me!"
Elric laughed lightly. "Now why should I, my friend?
Tell me that."
"I have been-been profaned-I am Slorg. I was
once a man-but those . . ."He rocked his body and
flung his rolling head backwards, the curved lids
falling down to cover his bulging eyes. "I have been
profaned ..."
Elric leaned forward on the pommel of his saddle
and said lazily: "This is none of my business, Master
Slorg."
The great head darted forward, the eyes snapped
open and Slorg's long lips writhed over his teeth like
a camel's. "Address not me by a mundane title! I am
Siletah Slorg-Siletah of Oberlorn-rightfully-rightfully."
The title was unknown to Elric.
"My apologies, O Siletah," he mocked, "for now I
observe a man of rank."
"A man no longer," whispered Slorg and began to
sob. "Help me."
"Are you, then, in danger?"
"Aye, danger-my kinsmen have set the Hungry
Whisperers upon me, do you not hear them?"
And Elric cocked his head to listen. Yes, he heard
sibilant voices now. "Where are you, morsel?"
"Oh, help me, help me," begged Slorg and lurched
toward Elric. The albino drew himself up and pulled
his horse back.
"No closer," he warned. "I am Elric of Melnibone."
Slorg's tattered face squeezed itself into a frown.
"Ah, the name and the face," he mumbled to himself,
"the face and the name. Elric of Melnibone.
Outcast!"
"Indeed," smiled Elric, "but no more than you, it
seems. Now I must bid you farewell and suggest, by
way of friendly advice, that you compose yourself
soon. It is better to die with dignity, Siletah Slorg,"
"I have powers, outcast of Melnibone-I have powers,
still! Help me and I will tell you secrets-such
secrets!"
Elric waved a disdainful hand. A moonbeam caught
for an instant the flash of the rare actorios ring
which reposed on his finger. "If you know me, you
should also know that I'm no merchant to bargain. I
ask nothing and give nothing. Farewell!"
"I warn you, Elric-I have one power left. I can
send you screaming from this place-into another. It
is the power which Teshwan gives all his servants-it
is the one he never takes back!"
"Why not send your hungry friends into this other
place?"
"They are not human. But if you leave me, I shall
lay my last enchantment upon you."
Elric sighed. "Your last, perhaps, but not the last
or the first to be laid upon me. Now I must go and
search for a quieter place than this where I can sleep
undisturbed."
He turned his horse and his back on the shaking
remnant of a man and rode away.
He heard Slorg calling again as he entered another
part of the forest, untainted by the Siletah or those
he had termed the Hungry Whisperers.
"Teshwan-return! Return to do me one last
service-a deed of vengeance-a part of our bargain,
Teshwan!"
A short time later Elric heard a thin, wailing scream
come flowing out of the night behind him and then
the whole forest seemed alive with horrible laughter.
Satiated, triumphant, chuckling.
His mood altered by his encounter, Elric rode through
night, not caring to sleep, and came out of the forest
in the morning, glad of the sight of the green plateau
stretching ahead of him.
"Well," he mused, "Teshwan disdained to aid
Slorg and it seems there is no enchantment on me. I
am half regretful. Now Slorg resides in the bellies of
those he feared and his soul's at home in Hell."
Then the plateau changed quite suddenly to grey
rock.
Swiftly Elric wheeled his horse. The plateau and
the forest was behind him. He spurred his mount
quickly forward and the plateau and forest faded
away to leave a vast and lonely expanse of flat, grey
stone. Above him the sun had disappeared and the
sky was bright and white and cold.
"Now," said Elric grimly into silence, "it seems I
was wrong in my assumption."
The plateau-its atmosphere-reminded him of another
environment in which he had once found himself.
Then he remembered clearly a time years before
when he and two companions had sought an ancient
volume called the Dead God's Book. Their questing
had led them to a cavern guarded at its entrance
by the symbol of the Lords of Chaos. In that cavern
they had discovered an underground sea which had
had unnatural qualities. There was the same sense
of a sardonically amused presence here as there had
been in the Caverns of Chaos.
Teshwan was a Lord of Chaos.
Hastily Elric pulled his runesword Stormbringer
from its thick scabbard.
The sword was dead.
Normally the blade, forged by unhuman smiths
for Elric's royal ancestors, was alive with sentiencethrobbing
with the life force it had stolen from a
hundred men and women whom Elric had slain.
Once before it had been like this-in the Caverns of
Chaos long ago.
Elric tightened his lips, then shrugged as he replaced
the sword in its scabbard.
"In a world completely dominated by the Forces
of Chaos," he said, "I cannot rely on the powers
which normally aid me in my sorcery. Thank Arioch
I have a good supply of drugs about me, or I would
indeed be doomed."
In earlier times Elric had relied on his soul-stealing
runesword to give him the energy which, as an
albino, he lacked intrinsically, but recently he had
rediscovered a cleaner way of counteracting his deficiency,
by taking herbs he had discovered in the
Forest of Troos where many unlikely things grew,
both flora and fauna.
"By my father's plague-infested bones," he swore.
"I must find a way off this granite plain and discover
who, if anyone, rules in this world. I have heard of
the powers invested in Teshwan's worshippers-and
I seem to remember a hint of why the Lords of
Chaos confer such peculiar talents upon them."
He shuddered.
He began to sing a ululating hate-song of old
Melnibone. Elric's ancestors had been clever haters.
And on he rode beneath the sunless sky.
He could not tell how much time had passed before
he saw the figure standing out strongly against
the featureless horizon.
Now on the flat waste of stone there were two
points at which the monotony was broken.
Elric-white, black and scarlet on a grey gelding.
The morose man, black hair lying like a coat of
lacquer on his rounded skull, dressed in green, a
silver sword dangling in his right hand.
Elric approached the man who raised his eyes to
regard the albino.
"This is a lonely place," said the stranger, sucking
at his fleshy cheeks, and he stared at the ground
again.
"True," replied Elric halting his horse. "Is this
your world or were you sent here, also?"
"Oh, it's my world," said the man, without looking
up. "Where are you bound?"
"For nowhere, seeking something. Where do you
journey?"
"I-oh, I go to Kaneloon for the Rites, of course."
"All things, it is said, are possible in the World of
Chaos," Elric murmured, "and yet this place seems
unusually barren."
The man looked up suddenly, and jerking his lips
into a smile, laughed sharply.
"The Rites will alter that, stranger. Did you not
know that this is the Time of The Change, when the
Lords of Chaos rest before re-forming the world into
a fresh variety of patterns?"
"I did not know that," said Elric. "I have come
here only recently."
"You wish to stay?"
"No."
"The Lords of Chaos are fickle. If you wished to
stay they might not let you. Now that you are resolved
to leave, they might keep you here. Farewell.
You will find me therein!" He lifted his sword and
pointed. A great palace of greenstone appeared at
once. The man vanished.
"This, at least, will save me from boredom," Elric
said philosophically, and rode towards the palace.
The many-pinnacled building towered above him,
its highest points hazy and seeming to possess many
forms, shifting as if blown by a wind. At the great
arch of the entrance a huge giant, semi-transparent,
with a red, scintillating skin, blocked his way. Over
the archway, as if hanging in the air above the giant's
proud head, was the Symbol of Chaos, a circle which
produced many arrows pointing in all directions.
"Who visits the Palace of Kaneloon at the Time of
the Change?" enquired the giant in a voice like limbo's
music.
"Your masters, I gather, know me-for they aided
their servant Slorg in sending me hither. But tell
them it is Elric of Melnibone, nonetheless-Elric,
destroyer of dreaming Imrryr, kinslayer and outcast.
They will know me."
The giant appeared to shrink, to solidify and then
to drift in a red mist, pouring like sentient smoke
away from the portal and into the palace. And where
he had been a portcullis manifested itself to guard
the palace in the giant's absence.
Elric waited patiently until at length the portcullis
vanished and the giant reformed himself.
"My masters order me to inform you that you may
enter but that, having once come to the Palace of
Kaneloon, you may never leave save under certain
conditions."
"Those conditions?"
"Of these they will tell you if you enter. Are you
reckless-or will you stand pondering?"
"I'll avail myself of their generosity," smiled Elric
and spurred his nervous horse forward.
As he entered the courtyard, it appeared that the
area within the palace was greater than that outside
it. Not troubling to seek any mundane explanation
for this phenomenon in a world dominated by the
Lords of Chaos, Elric instead dismounted from his
horse and walked for nearly a quarter of a mile until
he reached the entrance of the main building. He
climbed the steps swiftly and found himself in a vast
hall which had walls of shifting flame.
In the glow from the fiery walls, there sat at a
table at the far end of the hall nine men-or at least,
men or not, they had assumed the form of men.
Different in facial characteristics, they all had the
same sardonic air. In the centre of these nine was
the one who had first addressed Elric. He leaned
forward and spoke words carefully from his red lips.
"Greetings to you, mortal," he said. "You are the
first for some time to sit with the Lords of Chaos at
the Time of the Change. Behold-there are others
who have had the privilege."
A rent appeared in the wall of flame to disclose
some thirty frozen human figures, some men and
some women. They were petrified in positions of
many kinds, but all had madness and terror in their
eyes-and they were still alive, Elric knew.
He lifted his head.
"I would not be so impertinent, my lords, as to set
myself beside you all insofar as powers are concerned,
but you know that I am Elric of Melnibone
and that my race is old; my deficient blood is the
royal blood of the Kings of the Dreaming City. I
have little pity or sentiment of any kind within me,
for sentiment, whether love or hate, has served me
badly in the past. I do not know what you require of
me, and I thank you for your hospitality nonetheless,
but I believe that I can conduct myself better in
most ways than can any other mortal."
"Let us hope so, Elric of Melnibone, for we would
not wish you to fail, know that. Besides, you are not
fully mortal as humans understand the word. Now,
know you that I be Teshwan, and these need not be
named and may be addressed singly or collectively
by the name of Lords of Chaos."
Elric bowed politely. "Lord Teshwan-my Lords
of Chaos."
They returned his bow by slightly inclining their
heads and broadening a trifle their sardonic, crooked
smiles.
"Come," said Teshwan briskly, "sit here beside
me and I will inform you of what we expect. You are
more favoured than others have been, Elric, and, in
truth, I welcomed the opportunity given me by my
vengeful servant Slorg before he died."
Elric climbed upon the dais and seated himself in
the chair which appeared beside Teshwan. About
him the walls of flame soared and tumbled, mumbled
and roared. Sometimes shadow engulfed them,
sometimes they were bathed in light. For a while
they all sat in silence, pondering.
At last Teshwan spoke.
"Now," he said decisively. "Here's the situation
in which we have decided to place you. You may
leave only if you can create something which it has
never occurred to us to create."
"But you, surely, are the Masters of Creation?"
said Elric in puzzlement. "How may I do this?"
"Your first statement is not strictly true and in
qualifying it I can give you a hint of the answer to
your question. We of Chaos cannot make anything
new-we may only experiment with combinations of
that already created. Do you understand?"
"I do," said Elric.
"Only the Greatest Power, of which we know
little more than do humans, can create fresh conceptions.
The Greatest Power holds both Law and Chaos
in perpetual balance, making us war only so that the
scale will not be tilted too far to one side. We wish
not for power-only for variety. Thus every time we
weary of our domain and let our old creations fade
and conceive new ones. If you can bring a fresh
element to our domain, we shall free you. We create
jokes and paradoxes. Conceive a better joke and a
better paradox for our entertainment and you may
leave here."
"Surely you expect the impossible from me?"
"You alone may assess the truth of your question.
Now, we begin."
And Elric sat and watched, pondering his problem,
as the great Lords of Chaos began their mighty
experiments.
The walls of fire slowly flickered and faded and
again he saw the vast and barren plain of flat stone.
Then the air darkened and a sighing wind began to
moan over the plain. In the sky clouds blossomed in
myriad shapes, alien, dark, unfamiliar, blacks and
smoky orange, at the same time familiar . . .
The rock heaved like lava, became liquid, rearing
upwards and as it reared it became giants, mountains,
ancient beasts, monsters, gryphons, basilisks,
chimerae, unicorns. Forests bloomed, their growths
huge and exotic, elephants flew and great birds
crushed boiling mountains beneath their feet. Fingers
of brilliant colour climbed the sky, criss-crossing
and blending. A flight of wildly singing lions fell
from the firmament towards the forest and soared
upwards again, their music lonely.
As the forest melted to become an ocean, a vast
army of wizened homunculae came tramping from
its depths dragging boats behind them. For a short
while they marched over the seething waters and
then, with precision, began, in ordered style, to climb
into the flaring sky. When they had all left the ocean
behind them, they righted their boats, set their sails,
laughed and screamed and shouted, waved their
arms, climbed into the boats and with fantastic speed
streamed towards the horizon.
All creation tumbled and poured, malleable in the
Domain of Chaos. All was gusto, craze and roaring
terror, love, hate and music mingled.
The sky shook with multi-coloured mirth, blossoming
white shot through with veins of blue and
purple and black, searing red, splattered with spreading
flowers of yellow, smeared, smeared, smeared
with ghoulish green. Across this seething backdrop
sped bizarre shapes.
The Lords of Chaos shouted and sang their weird
creation and Elric, shouting also, thought the frozen
statues he had seen were weeping and laughing.
A grotesque combination of man and tree sent
roots streaming towards the earth to tug mountains
from the caverns it exposed and set them, peak first,
like inverted pyramids, into the ground. Upon the
flat surfaces dancers appeared in bright rags which
fluttered and flared around them. They were warped,
unhuman, pale as dead beauty, grinning fixedly and
then Elric saw the strings attached to their limbs and
the silently laughing puppet-master bearlike and gigantic,
controlling them. From another direction sped
a small, blind figure bearing a scythe that was a
hundred times bigger than the bearer. With a sweep,
he cut the strings and, with that action, the whole
faded to be replaced by a gushing brilliance of green
and orange flame which formed itself into streamers
of zigzagging disorder.
All this went on around them. The Lords of Chaos
smiled to themselves now, as they created, but Elric
frowned, watched with wonder and no little plea-
sure, but puzzled how he might emulate such feats.
For long hours the pageant of Chaos continued as
the Lords took the elements of Elric's world and
shook them about, turned them inside out, stood
them on end, made startling, strange, beautiful, unholy
combinations until they were satisfied with the
constant movement of the scene about them, the
perpetual shifting and changing. They had set a
pattern that was no pattern, which would last until
they became bored with their domain again and
brought about another Time of the Change.
Then their heads turned and all regarded Elric
expectantly.
Teshwan said a trifle wearily. "There-you have
seen what we can do."
"You are artists, indeed," said Elric, "and I am so
amazed by what I have witnessed that I need a little
time to think. Will you grant it me?"
"A little time-a little time only-we want to see
what you prepare for us while the excitement is still
upon us."
And Elric placed his white albino's head upon his
fist and thought deeply.
Many ideas occurred to him, only to be discarded,
but at length he straightened his back and said:
"Give me the power to create and I will create."
So Teshwan said smilingly. "You have the poweruse
it well. A joke and a paradox is all we require."
"The reward for failure?"
"To be forever conscious."
At this, Elric shivered and put his mind to concentrating,
searching his memory until a manlike figure
formed before him. Then he placed features on its
head and clothes on its body until there stood before
Elric and the Lords of Chaos a perfect replica-of
Elric.
Puzzledly, Teshwan said: "This is splendid imper-
tinence, I grant you-but this is nothing new-you
already sit there beside us."
"Indeed," replied Elric, "but look in the man's
mind."
They frowned and did as he asked. Then, smiling,
they nodded. "The paradox is good," said Teshwan,
"and we see your point. We have, for an eternity,
created the effect. You, in your pride and innocence,
have created the cause. In that man's mind was all
that could ever exist."
"You have noted the paradox?" asked Elric, anxious
that the correct interpretation had been divulged.
"Of course. For though the mind contains the
variety beloved of we of Chaos, it contains the order
that those barren Lords of Law would foist on the
world. Truly, young mortal, you have created everything
with a stroke. And thank you, also, for the
joke."
"The joke?"
"Why truly- the best joke is but a simple statement
of truth. Farewell. Remember, friend mortal,
that the Lords of Chaos are grateful to you."
And with that, the whole domain faded away and
Elric stood on the grassy plain. In the distance he
observed the city of Bakshaan which had been his
original destination, and nearby was his horse to
take him there.
He mounted, flapped the reins, and, as the grey
gelding broke into a trot, he said to himself: "A joke
indeed, but it is a pity that men do not laugh at it
more often."
Reluctantly, he headed for the city.
The Secret Life of Elric of Melnibone
SOME YEARS ago, when I was about eighteen, I wrote
a novel called The Golden Barge. This was an allegorical
fantasy about a little man completely without
self-knowledge and with little of any other kind,
going down a seemingly endless river, following a
great Golden Barge which he felt, if he caught it
would contain all truth, all secrets, all solutions to
his problems. On the journey he met various groups
of people, had a love affair, and so on. Yet every
action he took in order to reach the Golden Barge
seemed to keep him farther away from it. The river
represented Time, the barge was what mankind is
always seeking outside itself (when it can be found
inside itself), etc., etc. The novel had a sad ending,
as such novels do. Also, as was clear when I'd finished
it, my handling of many of the scenes was
clumsy and immature. So I scrapped it and decided
that in future my allegories would be intrinsic within
a conventional narrative-that the best symbols were
the symbols found in familiar objects. Like swords
for instance.
Up until I was twenty or so, I had a keen interest
in fantasy fiction, particularly Sword-and-Sorcery stories
of the kind written by Robert E. Howard, Clark
Ashton Smith and the like, but this interest began to
wane as I became more interested in less directly
sensational forms of literature, just as earlier my
interest in Edgar Rice Burroughs' tales had waned. I
could still enjoy one or two Sword-and-Sorcery tales,
particularly Poul Anderson's The Broken Sword and
Fritz Leiber's Grey Mouser stories. A bit before this
casting off of old loyalties, I had been in touch with
Sprague De Camp and Hans Santessen of fantastic
Universe about doing a new series of Conan tales.
I think it was in the autumn of 1960, when I was
working for Sexton Blake Library and reading SF for
Suspense (the short-lived companion to Argosy) that I
bumped into a colleague at Fleetway Publications,
Andy Vincent, who was an old friend of Harry Harrison's
(who had also freelanced for Fleetway for
some time). Andy told me he was meeting Harry
and Ted Carnell in the Fleetway foyer and suggested
I went along. As I remember, that was where I first
met Harry. Previously, I'd sold a couple of stories to
Ted, one in collaboration with Barry Bayley, and had
had more bounced than bought. Later on in a pub,
Ted and I were talking about Robert E. Howard and
Ted said he'd been thinking of running some Conantype
stuff in Science Fantasy. I told him of the fantastic
Universe idea which had fallen through when
Fantastic Universe folded, and said I still had the stuff
I'd done and would he like to see it. He said he
would. A couple of days later I sent him the first
chapter and outline of a Conan story. To tell you the
truth, writing in Howard's style had its limitations,
as did his hero as far as I was concerned, and I
wasn't looking forward to producing another 10,000
words of the story if Ted liked it.
Ted liked it-or at least he liked the writing, but
there had been a misunderstanding. He hadn't
wanted Conan-he had wanted something on the
same lines.
This suited me much better. I decided that I would
think up a hero as different as possible from the
usual run of S-and-S heroes, and use the narrative as
a vehicle for my own "serious' ideas. Many of these
ideas, I realise how, were somewhat romantic and
coloured by a long drawn-out and, to me, at the
time, tragic love affair which hadn't quite finished its
course and which was confusing and darkening my
outlook. I was writing floods of hack work for
Fleetway and was getting sometimes 70 or 80 a
week which was going on drink mainly, and, as
I remember, involved rather a lot of broken glass
of one description or another. I do remember,
with great pride, my main achievement of the
winter of 1960 or 1961, which was to smash entirely
an unbreakable plate-glass door in a well-known
restaurant near Piccadilly. And the management
apologised . . .
I mention this, to give a picture of my mood at the
time of Elric's creation. If you've read the early Elric
stories in particular, you'll see that Elric's outlook
was rather similar to mine. My point is, that Elric
was me (the me of 1960-1, anyway) and the mingled
qualities of betrayer and betrayed, the bewilderment
about life in general, the search for some solution to
it all, the expression of this bewilderment in terms of
violence, cynicism and the need for revenge, were
all characteristic of mine. So when I got the chance
to write The Dreaming City, I was identifying very
closely with my hero-villain. I thought myself something
of an outcast (another romantic notion largely
unsubstantiated now that I look back) and emphasised
Elric's physical differences accordingly:
His bizarre dress was tasteless and gaudy, and
did not match his sensitive face and longfingered,
almost delicate hands, yet he flaunted
it since it emphasised that he did not belong in
any company-that he was an outsider and an
outcast. But, in reality, he had little need to
wear such outlandish gear-for . . . (he) was a
pure albino who drew his power from a secret
and terrible source.
(Stealer of Souls, page 13)
The story was packed with personal symbols (as
are all the stories bar a couple). The "secret and
terrible source" was the sword Stormbringer, which
symbolised my own and others tendency to rely on
mental and physical crutches rather than cure the
weakness at source. To go further, Elric, for me,
symbolised the ambivalence of mankind in general,
with its love-hates, its mean-generosity, its confidentbewilderment
act. Elric is a thief who believes himself
robbed, a lover who hates love. In short, he cannot
be sure of the truth of anything, not even of his own
emotions or ambitions. This is made much clearer in
a story containing even more direct allegory, the
second in the series, While the Gods Laugh. Unfortunately,
Ted left out the verse from which the title
was taken:
I, while the gods laugh, the world's vortex am;
Maelstrom of passions in that hidden sea,
Whose waves of all-time lap the coasts of me,
And in small compass the dark waters cram.
Mervyn Peake (Shapes and Sounds)
This, I think, gave more meaning to both title and
story which involved a long quest after the Dead
God's Book-a mythical work alleged to contain all
the knowledge of the universe, in which Elric feels,
he will at last find the true meaning of life. He
expresses this need in a somewhat rhetorical way.
When the wingless woman Shaarilla asks him why
he wants the book he replies:
"I desire, if you like, to know one of (misprinted
as or in magazine version) two things.
Does an ultimate God exist or not? Does Law or
Chaos govern our lives? Man needs a God, so
the philosophers tell us. Have they made oneor
did one make them?" etc., etc.
Here, as in other passages, the bewilderment is
expressed in metaphysical terms, for at that time,
due mainly to my education I was very involved
with mysticism. Also, the metaphysical terms suited
the description of a Sword-and-Sorcery hero and his
magical, low-technology world.
It may seem odd that I use such phrases as "at that
time" and so on, as if I'm referring to the remote
past, but in many ways, being a trifle more mature,
perhaps, happily married with a better sense of direction,
etc., all this does seem to have taken place in
the remote past.
The Dead God's Book is eventually located in a
vast underground world which I had intended as a
womb-symbol, and after a philosophical conversation
with the book's keeper, Elric discovers it. This
passage is, to me now, rather overwritten, but, for
better or worse:
It was a huge book-the Dead God's Book, its
covers encrusted with alien gems from which
the light sprang. It gleamed, it throbbed with
light and brilliant colour.
"At last," Elric breathed. "At last-the truth!"
He stumbled forward like a man made stupid
with drink, his pale hands reaching for the
thing he sought with such savage bitterness.
His hands touched the pulsating cover of the
Book and, trembling, turned it back . . . With a
crash, the cover fell to the floor, sending the
bright gems skipping and dancing over the paving
stone. Beneath Elric's . . . hands lay nothing
but a pile of yellowish dust.
The Dead God's Book and the Golden Barge are
one and the same. They have no real existence, save
in the wishful imagination of mankind. There is, the
story says, no Holy Grail which will transform a
man overnight from bewildered ignorance to complete
knowledge-the answer already is within him,
if he cares to train himself to find it. A rather overemphasised
fact, throughout history, but one gener-
ally ignored all the same.
The Stealer of Souls, the third story, continues this
theme, but brought in rather different kinds of symbols.
Coupled with the Jungian symbols already inherent
in any tale using direct mythic material, I
used Freudian symbols, too. This was a cynical attempt
and a rather vulgar attempt to make the series
popular. It appeared to work. The Stealer of Souls,
whatever else it may be, is one of the most pornographic
stories I have ever written. In Freudian terms
it is the description of, if you like, a night's lovemaking.
Which brings me to another point. Although there
is comparatively little direct description of sexual
encounters in the stories and what there are are
largely romanticised, the whole Elric saga has, in its
choice of situations and symbols, very heavy sexual
undertones. This is true of most Sword-and-Sorcery
stories, but I have an idea that I may be the first
such author to understand his material to this extent,
to know what he's using. If I hadn't been a bit
fed-up by the big response received by The Stealer of
Souls (magazine story, not the book) I could have
made even greater use of what I discovered.
Other critics have pointed out the close relationship
the horror story (and often the SF story for that
matter) has with the pornographic story, so there's
no need to go any deeper into it here.
The pornographic content of the Elric saga doesn't
interest me much, but I have hinted at the relationship
between sex and violence in several stories, and
indeed, there are a dozen syndromes to be found in
the stories, particularly if you bear in mind my own
involvement with sexual love, expression in violence,
etc., at the time the stories were first conceived.
Even my own interpretation of what I was doing is
open to interpretation, in this case!
The allegory goes through all ten stories (including
To Rescue Tanelorn which did not feature Elric) in
Science Fantasy, but it tends to change its emphasis as
my own ideas take better shape and my emotions
mature. When, in the last Elric story of all, the sword,
his crutch, Stormbringer turns and slays Elric it is
meant to represent, on one level, how mankind's
wish-fantasies can often bring about the destruction
of (till now at least) part of mankind. Hitler, for instance,
founded his whole so-called "political" creed
on a series of wish-fantasies (this is detailed in that
odd book Dawn of Magic, recently published here).
Again this is an old question, a bit trite from being
asked too often, maybe, but how much of what we
believe is true and how much is what we wish were
true. Hitler dreamed of his Thousand Year Reich,
Chamberlain said There Will Be No War. Both were
convinced-both ignored plain fact to a frightening
extent, just as many people (not just politicians whose
public statements are not always what they really
believe) ignore plain facts today. This is no new
discovery of mine. It is probably one of the oldest
discoveries in the world. But, in part, this is what
nearly all my published work points out. Working,
as I did once, as editor of a party journal (allegedly
an information magazine for party candidates) this
conviction was strengthened. The build-up of a fantasy
is an odd process and sometimes happens, to
digress a bit, like this.
The facts are gathered, related, a picture emerges.
The picture, though slightly coloured by the personalities
of the fact-relaters, is fairly true. The picture is
given to the politician. If the politician is a man of
integrity he will not deliberately warp the facts, but
he will present them in a simplified version which
will be understood by the general public (he thinks).
This involves a selection, which can change a picture
out of all recognition, though the politician didn't
deliberately intend to warp the facts. The other kind
of politician almost automatically selects and warps
in order to prove a point he, or his party, is trying to
make. So the fantasy begins. Soon the real picture is
almost irrevocably lost.
Therefore this reliance on pseudo-knowledge which
seems to prove something we wish were true, is a
dangerous thing to do.
This is one of the main messages of the Elric
series, though there are several others on different
levels.
Don't think I'm asking you to go back over the
stories looking for these allegories and symbols. The
reason I abandoned The Golden Barge was because
among other things-it wasn't entertaining. The Elric
stories are meant to entertain as much as anything
else, but if anyone cares to look for substance beyond
the entertainment level, they might find it.
One of the main reasons, though, for taking this
angle when Alan (Dodd) asked me to write a piece
on Elric, was because I have been a little disappointed
at the first book being dismissed by some
professional critics (who evidently didn't bother to
read it closely, if at all) as an imitation of Conan.
When you put thought and feeling into a storythought
and feeling which is yours-you don't much
care for being called an imitator or a plagiarist however
good or bad the story. Probably the millionth
novel about a young advertising executive in love
with a deb and involved with a married woman has
just been published, yet the author won't be accused
of imitating anyone or plagiarising anyone. It is the
use to which one puts one's chosen material, not
that material, which matters.
SOJAN
THE
SWORDSMAN
1. Daughter of a Warrior King
A MYAT trotted peacefully across the broad, seemingly
never-ending plain which made up the landscape
as far as it was possible to see. No sound
issued from the cloven hoofs, muffled by the mosslike
substance which clothed the ground in a mantle
of vivid colour-purple, green and yellow, with a
trace of crimson or violet here and there. Nothing
grew upon that plain. It was a wilderness, barren,
deserted-the greatest desert on the planet of Zylor.
A wandering warrior sat astride the myat's broad
back. At his steed's side hung a shield, a virtually
unknown accoutrement on Zylor, but the tribe to
which Sojan belonged had perfected it as a valuable
asset. The beast upon which he rode was a big,
sturdy animal. From both sides of its huge head
grew long sharp horns, curving outward. More like
a reptile than a mammal, its head tapered like a
snake's, its tail was thick and it, too, tapered.
Sojan was clothed in a bright blue jerkin reaching
to his knees, his legs were bare and tough boots of
myat hide were upon his feet, reaching to about two
inches from his knees. Over the jerkin was a leather
harness of simple design-two straps across his shoulders,
coming to the waist and attached to a broad
belt whereupon hung his weapons-a sword, a dirk,
long and sharp, and a holster containing his big,
round-butted air-pistol.
The mercenary's hair was long and held by a fillet
of leather. At the back of his big saddle were two
saddle-bags, a container of water and, rolled across
these, his crimson cloak.
The man himself was tall, broad-shouldered and
slim-waisted with smooth muscles rippling beneath
his jerkin. The perfect fighting-man, keen-eyed and
wary.
Suddenly Sojan caught a flash of marble to the
west and knew that he had sighted Vermlot, the
capital city of Hatnor, the greatest warrior nation of
a warrior world. A rich city, was Vermlot, rich in
fighting-men and weapons of war, rich in terms of
gold, rich in beauty and splendour.
As he neared the city walls a guard bade him halt
and state his business.
"I come in peace," he cried, "to offer my sword,
my loyalty and my life to his Imperial Highness, the
War Lord of Hatnor. I am a mercenary, my only
possessions are the clothes I wear, the weapons I
carry and the myat I ride. I have travelled half a
world to offer my services to your ruler!"
He was admitted to the city and made his way to
one of the many taverns situated within the protection
of the mighty walls. His strange protective
weapon aroused much interest. A certain warrior
made mock of him and his shield.
"Oh!" he laughed. "What a brave mercenary! He
has travelled half a world-to give us his protectionfor
with his great shield in front of him he will be
able to withstand all our enemies. Perhaps he cannot
fight without it. That's so, is it not, mercenary?"
Sojan halted, and gazed up at the man who was
leaning against a pillar on the balcony above.
Grimly, quietly, he spoke, but his tones were cold
and his words were acid.
"I do not like your attitude," he said. "And I like
your words less. Draw your sword-if you know
how to use it-and defend yourself! Perhaps you
will be hiding behind the shield before I have finished
with you!"
The warrior stiffened and his face flushed: he put
one hand on the balcony rail and vaulted into the
street below, drawing his long "vilthor", a sabre-like
weapon, as he did so.
Sojan unslung his shield from the myat and drew
his own long blade. The warrior of the Palace struck
first, aiming a wicked slash at Sojan's legs with his
curved vilthor but the mercenary from Ilthoth jumped
high in the air and attacked the other with a weaving
arc of steel, driving him further and further
back. Then the man saw his chance and slashed at
an exposed limb of the mercenary's, but was too
slow. There was a dull thud as the sword hit and
rebounded from the shield, then he was made to
duck beneath a vicious slash from Sojan.
The Vermlotian slowly lost ground until with a
flick of his wrist Sojan disarmed his opponent. Then,
from a second-storey window a figure dropped, first
to the balcony of the first-storey and from there to
the ground. He removed his cloak and, with a smile
upon his lips, came forward with drawn sword.
"I fancy you will not disarm me so quickly."
This time Sojan was not so lucky for the newcomer
was as quick as the proverbial cobra. His
sword weaved an invisible circle around Sojan's guard
and the newcomer soon had him at his mercy. Before
he knew it, the mercenary's sword flew from
his grasp and clattered to the earth, ten feet away.
"Yield?" questioned the victor.
"I yield," panted he. "You are a great fighter.
Who are you, sir?"
"Perhaps you have heard of me," smiled his late
adversary, "I am Nornos Kad, War Lord of the Imperial
Empire of Hatnor!"
"Sir," said Sojan with a bow, "I, who came to
enlist in your service and offer my aid to you, begin
by fighting you. I crave your forgiveness."
Nornos Kad laughed. "Never mind, you did very
well against my warrior here. To best him is a test
indeed and I feel that I would do well to enlist your
services." He signed to a servant who was waiting
in a doorway. "Come, you will be my guest until I
have need of you. Here, Oumlat, take Sojan to one
of the best guest rooms and see that he is well
looked after."
For a week or so Sojan enjoyed the privileges of
the Royal Guest until one morning a messenger came
to say that Nornos Kad had asked for him.
"I summoned you, Sojan," Nornos Kad said, when
they were alone, "because you are to accompany me
on a journey. Our mission is to take Il-that, princess
of Sengol, back to her father's country. I desire to
bring Sengol into the Hatnorian alliance without
bloodshed if possible and the king would think well
of it if his daughter was personally escorted home by
the War Lord himself. You had better prepare your
weapons and be ready to move from your quarters
by dawn tomorrow."
Ten warships, heavily armed with Hatnorian airguns
which worked on the simple principle of compressed
air, with a range of over half a mile, and the
Royal Airship, were ready to take to the air early the
next morning. They rose majestically, hovered for a
few moments, and then, with motors purring, the
great gas-bags veered off towards Sengol which lay
far to the north.
Within three or four hours they had crossed the
outermost boundary of Hatnor and her satellites and
were winging their way at a steady eighty miles an
hour over Veronlam, a country which owed no allegiance
to Hatnor and which, although fearing the
mighty Empire, was constantly stirring up petty strife
between the minor Hatnorian nationals. They had
nearly reached the border of Veronlam when the
soft purr of motors was heard and a shell whistled
past them and exploded in their rear air container.
"Veronlam pirates!" yelled the fore-gunner.
Quickly the small fleet formed a protective barrier
about the Royal ship. One airship was hit a dozen
times in as many different places and hurtled downwards,
flames roaring from the gas-bag and the crew
jumping overboard rather than die in the flames.
Nornos Kad realised at once that to fight against
so many would soon end in disaster for his fleet,
and he ordered them to turn about and flee back to
Hatnor. He decided to rely upon his speedier engines
to aid them rather than their powerful guns.
The Hatnorian fleet circled and fled. Nornos Kad
was the last to leave the battle and hastily turned
about to follow his ships. But alas, it was too late,
for three well-aimed shots in their main tank sent
them spiralling slowly to earth to land with a sickening
crash amidst a tangle of red-hot girders and
flaming fabric. Being on the platform of the ship
Nornos Kad, Sojan and Il-that were flung clear of
the main wreckage, to lie stunned.
Sojan did not know how long it was he lay amidst
the wreckage of the Royal Airship, but when he
awoke it was dawn. He knew that none could have
escaped if they had been trapped in the wreckage
but nevertheless he spent a fruitless two hours searching
for his companions-all he found were two or
three charred corpses but none lived. Convinced
that his companions were dead he took the only
unbroken water bottle and set off in the direction of
Hatnor. Sojan's eye caught the gleam of white stone
far to the south of his position. With a sigh of relief
he began to walk quickly towards the gleam which
grew soon into a patch and from that into a city, its
walls towering fifty paces in places. Knowing that
he was still probably in Veronlam he knew that it
would be useless to try to gain admission on the
strength of his allegiance to Nornos Kad the War
Lord. Stripping himself of his Hatnorian Navy-Cloak
and also his Navy-type gauntlets he stood arrayed as
when he had first entered Hatnor, as a mercenary
swordsman.
He easily gained admittance to the city of Quentos
as mercenaries were always welcome to swell the
ranks of any army.
"By Mimuk, friend, you're the third to pass through
these gates this day," the guard said, as he was
allowed to enter the city.
"The third. That's strange is it not, guard?" replied
Sojan. "Three people in one day! Mimuk, you
must be joking!"
"I joke not, friend mercenary, strange as it seems
two others have preceded you and one of them was
a woman. Our warriors found them near the wreck
of an airship. Some say the ones we captured were
Nornos Kad himself and Il-that, daughter of Hugor
of Sengol. Two prizes indeed if it be the truth."
Sojan strode off in the direction indicated by the
friendly guard.
Arriving at the tavern he hired a room and ordered
himself a meal. Finishing his repast, he was
horrified to find that the only money he had was
that of Hatnor. If he tried to pass this he knew that
the suspicions of the keeper of the tavern would be
instantly aroused. What should he do? He had
brought nothing with him to the tavern save his
sword, shield and poinard and the clothes he wore.
He reasoned that the only chance he stood was to
try and slip quietly out of the door before the proprietor
spotted him and ordered him to pay his bill.
Just as he thought he had reached the safety of the
street a hand fell on his shoulder and the leering
face of the landlord was brought close to his.
"Going so soon, my lord? Methinks you would
like to stay and sample some more of our victuals
before you make your-er-hasty departure," he said
with ponderous sarcasm. "Now pay up or my men'll
make sure you pay for your meal-in blood!"
"You threaten me, by Mimuk!" cried Sojan, his
easily roused temper getting the better of him. "You
dare threaten me! Draw your weapon!"
"Hey, Tytho, Zatthum, Wanrim-come and save
me from this murdering bilker!" cried the keeper of
the tavern in terror.
Instantly three ruffians appeared in the narrow
doorway and, drawing their blades, rushed at Sojan,
causing him to release his grasp upon the unfortunate
man and turn to face this new danger.
Zatthum went down in the first minute with an
inch of steel marking its path through his heart. The
remaining two were not so easily defeated. Back and
forth across the narrow street the three fought, sparks
flying from their blades, the clang of their weapons
resounding upon the rooftops. Sojan was marked in
a dozen places, but his adversaries were bleeding in
as many as he was. With a quick thrust, a parry and
another thrust the mercenary succeeded in dispatching
the second man. Now only Tytho was left. Sojan
allowed himself to be headed off and the man edged
him completely around so that they were now
retracing their path. With a mighty effort Sojan, who
was still tired after his narrow escape from the airship,
gathered his remaining strength together and
made a vicious lunge in Tytho's direction. He cried
out in pain when Sojan's blade found the muscles of
his left arm, but did not relax his grip upon his own
sword. Again Sojan was forced further back towards
the gaping crowd which had collected outside the
tavern. His shield saved him from the thrust designed
to end the fight but he knew he could not last
longer for he was rapidly tiring. Suddenly his foot
caught in the trappings of one of the dead men's
harnesses and he fell backwards across the corpse. A
grim smile graced Tytho's face as he raised his sword
to deliver the final thrust.
"Kill him, Tytho, kill him," the crowd roared in
frenzied bloodlust.
Sojan, entangled in the harness of the man he had
slain, tried to rise but was stopped from doing so by
a shove from Tytho's booted foot.
The hireling raised his sword again and the Crowd
leaned forward.
Suddenly there was a disturbance at one end of
the street and the crowd quickly began to disperse.
As it did so, Tytho saw the City Patrol, scourge of
the city thieves, was the cause of the crowd's disappearance.
Looking hurriedly about him for a way of
escape he found none; he dropped his sword and
began to run, foolishly, along the street.
The leader of the Patrol raised his pistol. There
was the slight hiss of escaping air and the running
hireling gave a short cry, threw up his arms, stumbled
and dropped on the cobbles of the street.
"What's happening here?"
By this time Sojan had disentangled himself from
the harness of his late opponent and was standing,
legs a'sprawl, hand to head.
"You've saved my life, sir!" he gasped. "These
ruffians attacked me for my money. I succeeded in
killing two but unfortunately became tangled up with
this fellow." He indicated the body. "Tytho was
about to finish me when you arrived!"
The leader laughed. "You certainly accounted very
well for yourself," he said, "these three are among
the worst of the type with whom we have to contend.
Ruthless murderers, perfect swordsmen." Again
he laughed. "Or almost perfect. You did us a service
and I am grateful."
He surveyed Sojan's bloodstained and tattered
clothing.
"You're a stranger here are you not?" he enquired.
"A mercenary swordsman, perhaps?"
"Yes, I am named Sojan-they nickname me
'Shieldbearer' as I use this." Sojan pointed to his
shield.
"Well, Sojan Shieldbearer, how would you like to
bear a shield and wield a sword in the Patrol?"
Instantly Sojan saw his chance. If he could get a
post in the organised militia of the city, he might be
able to contact his prisoned friends.
"It has always been my ambition to serve in the
Veronlamite Guard," he lied, "but to become a member
of the great Patrol is a chance for which I had not
dared hope."
"Then come with us and we'll enlist you immediately.
And," he added, "get you a decent jerkin and
harness."
Before he could become a full-fledged Patrolman,
Sojan had to undergo a course of basic training.
When this was finished, his duties were to Patrol,
with his men, a certain section of the city, and arrest
any thieves, footpads or similar wrongdoers. The
"justice" was rough indeed and was not appreciated
by the population. All the time he heard rumours
and from these rumours he gleaned that Nornos
Kad and Il-that were imprisoned somewhere in the
Prison of Zholun-a mighty towered building situated
near the centre of the city. Sojan knew well that
the Patrol's duties included patrolling the prison and
acting as guards to "special" prisoners-and he was
hoping that he would be given this assignment soon.
Sure enough, one day his hopes were fulfilled and
he was assigned to guard a section of Zholun Prison.
With his eyes wide open, Sojan learned where the
two were imprisoned.
"One is in the East tower-the other in the West.
Nornos Kad lies in the East tower," a guard told
Sojan one night after Sojan had plied him with enough
ale to get him drunk.
Sojan had to work fast; there were rumours that
his friends were to die by the sword in two days'
time.
His first loyalty was to Nornos Kad. He contrived
to enter the East tower wherein Nornos Kad was
imprisoned. Stealthily he made his way to the metalstudded
door of the cell.
"Nornos Kad," he whispered.
He heard the rattle of chains and through the bars
of the door saw his chieftain's handsome face, drawn
and pale through lack of food and sleep.
"Sojan!" exclaimed the War Lord. "I thought you
died in the crash!"
"I am alive and here to save you if I can. I was
assigned to guard the West wing so it will be more
difficult-however I shall try and get the keys. Until
I return-have hope!"
And with that Sojan crept back along the gloomy
passage. On return he found that the Patrolman on
duty was talking to someone. He waited until the
man had left and then walked into the little room
which was being used to house guards.
"Hullo, Stontor," cried Sojan, "what's up?"
Stontor looked worried. "It's my wife, Sojan, she's
been taken ill and I can't leave my post."
Sojan saw his chance.
"Well, you go and help her," he said. "I'll stay
here until you get back. Don't worry."
"Thanks a lot, Sojan, you're a friend indeed. Here
are the keys-shouldn't think there'll be much doing
tonight." And with that he picked up his cloak and
ran down the long passage.
Hastily Sojan picked up the keys and ran back to
Nornos Kad's cell. Unlocking the door he helped
Nornos Kad from his chains.
"I was lucky-a coincidence-guard's wife ill-but
the main trouble will be getting out of the city," he
panted, as he unlocked the heavy padlocks.
Together they returned to the guards' room. Here
Sojan left Nornos Kad. Then he made his way back
to the West wing where it was a simple matter to get
the princess from her cell. Silently they returned to
Nornos Kad.
Keeping to the sidestreets and the shadows, the
three sped along towards the city gates.
Suddenly Nornos Kad hissed, "Stop! Stop, Sojan,
there may be an easier way." He pointed to a flat
area dotted with hangers and anchored airships.
"With one of those we would have a better chance
of escaping."
"But how?" enquired Sojan.
Again Nornos Kad pointed. "You see that small
ship nearest to us-the one anchored down by a
couple of ropes?" The ship of which he was speaking
was fifteen feet above them, held to the ground
by anchors attached to heavy ropes. "With luck we
could gain the ship and climb the ropes."
Stealthily they padded along the side of the field,
keeping well into the shadows all the time. A single
guard lolled on the ground. Sojan crept behind him
and reversing his pistol, knocked the man unconscious.
With Sojan's and Nornos Kad's help, Il-that was
able to climb the rope and they boarded the ship. As
they clambered over the rail a light suddenly appeared
from one of the cabins and an armed man
appeared on deck. He was followed by three others.
"Mimuk!" he cried. "What have we here?"
There was no time for words and, handing Nornos
Kad his long dirk and Il-that his pistol, Sojan drew
his sword, and engaged the man and his companions.
Nornos Kad was close behind him. Back and
forth across the narrow deck the six men fought,
and the four crewmen were no mean battlers. Nornos
Kad, weak from his sojourn in Zholun Prison, still
put up a good fight. Together they succeeded in
killing two of their opponents-but the other two
were better swordsmen. The clash of steel echoed
across the silent field. Sojan was blinded by the
sudden flash of a searchlight and taking advantage
of this, his opponent cut past his guard and made a
painful gash in his side. The pain was like fire and
Sojan could barely restrain himself from crying out.
He stumbled to the deck and with a cry of triumph
the crewman raised his sword. A sudden hiss and a
strangled gasp and he collapsed over Sojan. Turning
his head he saw Il-that with the pistol in her hand.
"Thanks," was all he could say as he struggled to
his feet and ran to help Nornos Kad.
While Nornos Kad threw the bodies overboard,
Sojan started the engines. Below them they heard
shouts of a Patrol and two searchlights were now
levelled on the swaying airship. Soon they heard
cries as the bodies of the crewmen were found.
With two sword strokes Nornos Kad cut the anchoring
ropes and the ship rose swiftly into the air.
There was a coughing roar and the propellers began
to turn. The searchlights followed them; all around
them shells whistled.
Suddenly, behind them, they saw that three
battlecruisers of the fastest and heaviest type had
risen to follow them.
"More speed, Sojan, more speed!" cried Nornos
Kad. "Make for Sengol, it's nearer."
With a glance at the compass, Sojan turned the
ship's nose towards the North. Nearer and nearer
came the battlecruisers, guns popping softly. Il-that,
a true daughter of a warrior king, climbed into the
gunner's rear-seat and aimed the guns of their own
ship at the pursuing cruisers. She pressed the triggers
and the twin muzzles of the gun gave a jerk, a
hiss, and there was an explosion. What all a gunner's
skill could not easily have accomplished, Il-that
had done with luck-brought down a cruiser in its
most vulnerable spot-the main gas-bag. Flames
roared from the fabric and the ship lost height. Faster
and faster it went as the earth pulled it downwards.
The engines roaring to the last it crashed with a flash
of orange and crimson flame. But the other two
ships had still to be accounted for and Il-that was
not so lucky this time.
For two hours the chase continued, neither gaining
and all the time the shells from the Veronlam
craft were getting closer and closer as the gunner
perfected his aim.
"They will catch us soon," cried Il-that, who still
sat in the rear-gunner's seat, "they seem to be drawing
closer!"
"Then we shall have to land and hope that we're
not still in Veronlam," yelled Nornos Kad above the
shrieking wind.
"It will be a long time for us to do so, sir," Sojan
told Nornos Kad, "we have no anchors, and to release
the gas in the gas-bag would mean that while
we lost height we should also lose speed."
"Then there's only one thing we can do!" cried
the Emperor, "and that's this!" Raising his sword he
cut deep into the nearest gas-bag. He was thrown to
the deck as the contents rushed out and almost at
once the ship began to drop, dangerously fast. The
three stood by the side, ready to jump.
With a hard jolt the ship touched the ground,
bumped along it, and stopped. Over the side the
three companions went and ran over soft moss to
the sheltering shadows of some rocks as the Veronlamite
searchlights began to stab into the darkness.
But it was easy to hide in the rocks and the caves
sheltered them when the Veronlams landed and made
a vain search for them.
In the morning it was an easy matter to walk to
the nearest Sengolian city and thence to the capital,
where the king gratefully took his daughter and
promised that Sengol would always be an ally to
Hatnor.
(Original draft c. 1955)
2. Mission to Asno
MOTORS PURRING, captains shouting orders, the rustle
of the canvas gun-covers being drawn back, gay
flags, flashing steel, flying cloaks of many hues; a
Hatnorian war-fleet rose rapidly into the sky.
On the deck of the flagship stood a tall, strong
figure-that of Sojan, nicknamed "Shieldbearer", second
in command to the great War Lord of Hatnor
himself-Nornos Kad.
At his side was a long broadsword, upon his back
his round shield; his right hand rested on the butt of
his heavy air-pistol-an incredibly powerful weapon.
Clad in a jerkin of sky-blue, a divided kilt of deep
crimson and boots of dark leather, over his shoulder
his leathern war-harness, he was the typical example
of a Zylorian mercenary, whose love of bright garb
was legendary.
The great war-fleet was destined for Asno-a country
far to the north of Hatnor where the king, so the
spies told, was raising an army of mercenaries to
attack Yundrot-a colony of the Hatnorian Empire.
To stop a major war, Nornos Kad decided to send
a mighty fleet to crush the attack before it was started.
Having other business, he assigned Sojan to take his
place and instructed him to completely wipe out any
signs of an attack.
Only too pleased at the chance of battle, Sojan had
readily assented and was now on his way-the entire
fleet under his command.
Soon the fleet was winging its way over Asno-a
land of snow and ice, fierce beasts, great tracts of
uninhabited icefields-uninhabited, that is, by civilised
beings.
In another hour it would be over Boitil, the capital
city.
"Gunners, take your positions!" Sojan roared
through cupped hands and picking up a megaphonefor
there was no radio on Zylor-shouted the same
orders, which went from ship to ship until every
gunner was seated in his seat, guns loaded and
ready for firing.
"Drop two hundred feet!" Sojan roared again to
the steersman, and repeated these orders to the other
captains, who in turn shouted them to their own
steersmen.
"Prepare hand weapons and fasten down loose
fixtures, check gas-bag coverings, every man to position!"
Sojan shouted when the ships had all dropped
two hundred feet.
"Slow speed!" The ships slowed into "secondspeed."
In Zylorian naval terms there are five speeds:
"Speed No. 1" is fastest possible, "Speed No. 2" is a
fifth of this slower, and so on. When a commander
gives the order to slow when travelling at Speed No.
1, the ship automatically adjusts to Speed No. 2; if
going at No. 2 and told to slow, it changes to No. 3.
Now they were over the outskirts of the city, dropping
lower and lower until Sojan thought they would
touch the very towers of Boitil, scanning the squares
and flying-fields for signs of the army. Halfway over
the city a message was passed to Sojan that a great
army camp had been spotted-just on the outskirts
of the city. At the same time someone yelled for him
to look, and doing so he saw that a fleet almost as
large as his own was rising from flying-fields all over
the vast city.
"Prepare for battle!" he shouted.
As one, the safety catches of the guns were pushed
off.
"Shoot as you will!" Sojan ordered.
There was a muffled "pop" and the hiss of escaping
air as the explosive shells of the Hatnorian craft
were sent on their mission of destruction. Almost at
once the enemy retaliated.
Two Hatnorian ships, one only slightly damaged,
the other a mass of roaring yellow and blue flame,
dropped earthwards.
For twelve hours the great air-battle was fought,
developing into ship-to-ship duels as the opposing
sides became mixed. Bit by bit the battle moved
southwards until it was over the great ice wastes.
But expert handling of their craft, superior marksmanship
and a slightly superior weight of numbers
on the part of the Hatnorian fleet was slowly but
surely weakening the Asnogian fleet. Sojan, now
with a gun mounted on the officer's platform, was
taking an active part in the battle. His uncanny ability
to hit almost whatever he aimed at was taking
great toll. Everywhere ships were hurtling earthwards,
crashing in an inferno of flame, or merely
bouncing gently when a gas-bag was only slightly
punctured.
At last, one by one, the enemy began to flee. The
other ships, seeing their companions escape, disengaged
and followed them. The hired ships, manned
mainly by mercenaries, flew in every direction but
that of Asno, while the Asnogian craft turned and
headed for their home base. In this direction went
the Hatnorian fleet, re-forming to a close formation
and turning to No. 1 speed. If they overtook a ship it
was ruthlessly shot down; but half a dozen or so
were lucky and escaped them. In three hours they
were back over Asno and bombing the troop encampment
with incendiaries until nothing remained
of the great camp but smouldering fabric and twisted
steel. Through the south gate of the city streamed
forth ragged bands of hired soldiers, bent on escaping
while they could. The planned attack on a
Hatnorian colony had not even begun. A just reprisal
on Nornos Kad's part. A reprisal carried out in
full by Sojan. But his business was not finished and,
landing on part of an undamaged airfield, Sojan
ordered the frightened commanding officer to take
him to King Tremorn of Asno.
"I bring a message from my Emperor!" he cried
when he was in the vast chamber which housed the
king's court. All around him stood courtiers and
servants, worried and anxious to hear his terms.
Great pillars supported the roof and brilliant tapestries
hung from the ceiling. Murals on the walls
depicted scenes of battles, on land, water and in the
air.
"Speak your message," ordered the king. "What
are your terms? I admit that I am beaten! For the
present!" he added.
"For all time, sir, while a member of the Nornis
family sits on the throne of Hatnor!" Sojan replied.
"Now, do you wish to hear my terms?"
"Speak!"
"The first is that you acknowledge allegiance to
Hatnor and pay a tribute of five hundred young men
to train in our armies every tenth year. The second is
that you disband any army you still have, save for
policing your city. On signs of attack, you will notify
the Empire, who will come to your aid. As a member
of the Empire you will be subject to all laws and
trading terms of the Empire and in times of major
war shall enlist two-thirds of your fighting strength
in the armies of Hatnor and the remaining third if
called upon. You will not make war-ships or weapons
of war, save hand weapons, for your own use,
but all war-ships and arms shall be sent direct to the
capital. Do you recognise these terms?"
The king paused and, turning to his major domo,
whispered a few words to him. The man nodded.
"Yes, I recognise your terms," he sighed.
"Then sign your name and oath to this document
and seal it with your royal seal. Upon the breaking
of your word, the lapse shall be punished according
to the magnitude."
Sojan handed the paper to a courtier who carried
it to the king. The act of bowing to a king is unknown
upon the planet Zylor, instead the subject
places his right hand upon his heart to signify complete
allegiance.
So it was that Sojan achieved his purpose. But
more adventures were yet to come before he could
return to his palace at Hatnor.
3. Revolt in Hatnor
"SOJAN, SOJAN!" the call rang across the clear Zylorian
sky as a small scout-ship veered towards the larger
warship, the flagship of Sojan, second-in-command
to the War Lord of Hatnor-Nornos Kad.
"Who are you?" Sojan's lieutenant roared through
a megaphone.
"I bring urgent tidings from the court of Nornos
Kad-the land is in turmoil!"
"Come alongside," the man roared.
As the scout-ship drew alongside, an armed man
jumped from it and rushed up the ladder to the
platform whereon Sojan stood.
"Sojan! While the fleet has been at war, revolution
has swept through the land. Nornos Kad has been
deposed and a tyrant sits on the throne of Hatnor.
There is a price upon your head and upon the heads
of all whom you command.
"Flee now, Sojan, while you have the chance.
Trewin the Upstart controls the city and half the
Empire. The other half is in a state of unrest, unsure
whether to support one Emperor or another!"
"I cannot flee while my Emperor rots in chainstell
me, who still cries 'Loyalty to the Nornis family'?"
"None openly, Sojan. A few are suspected, but
they are still powerful nobles and even Trewin dare
not arrest them without cause."
Sojan's face became grim and he clenched his hand
upon his sword hilt.
"Lun!" he cried. "Order the fleet to turn about and
adjust to Speed One!"
A look of surprise crossed his lieutenant's face.
"We're not running, Sojan?"
"Do as I say!"
"Turn about and adjust to Speed One!" Lun
shouted through his megaphone.
At once the great fleet turned gracefully about and
adjusted, speed by speed, until it was flying at maximum
speed. There were puzzled looks in the eyes of
many of Sojan's captains, but they obeyed his order.
"Tell them to set a course for Poltoon," he ordered
Lun. Lun did so and soon every ship was heading
south-to the steaming jungles and burning deserts
of the Heat Lands.
"Why do we sail for Poltoon, Sojan?" asked Lun.
But Sojan's only reply was, "You will see," and he
resumed his earnest conversation with the messenger
who had brought him the news.
On the third day they were sailing at No. 1 speed
over a vast belt of jungle, seemingly impenetrable.
But Sojan's eyes, less atrophied by civilised living,
caught what he had been looking for-a patch of
green, lighter than the dark green which predominated.
"STOP!" he roared. "Stop and hover-no one is to
drop anchor."
The flying machines of the Zylorian nations are
usually very similar to our airships. The gondola is
supported by steel hawsers depending from the main
gas-bag. The propeller is adjustable and can be slung
either fore or aft of the ship-it is usually slung aft.
They are steered by two methods, a rudder aft plus
manipulation of the propeller. A normal sized warship
usually mounts five guns-two very powerful
ones fore and aft, a smaller one on the captain's
platform and two mounted in a platform on top of
the huge gas-bag. The gunners reach this platform
by means of ladders from the deck to the platform.
This position is extremely dangerous and if ever the
gas-bag is hit it is unlikely that a gas-bag gunner
could ever escape.
The ships stopped as ordered and while they
waited, Sojan had his ship drop downwards, nearer
and nearer to the little patch of green which became
a small clearing, just large enough to land one ship,
but for a fleet of over fifty ships to land here was
impossible. With a slight bump the ship dropped to
the ground and the anchor was thrown into the soft
grass. Sojan ordered that the gas-bags be deflated.
They could always be inflated again as every ship
carried a large supply of gas-cylinders.
Now the ship was only a third of the size and was
dragged into the undergrowth which was not at all
thick. Sojan told his crew of eight to get to work and
chip down all the small growth but to leave the huge
forest giants standing. This they did and very soon
the clearing widened and as it did so a new ship
dropped down until the fifty were all deflated and
covering a large area of ground under the trees. The
cabins made excellent living quarters so there was
no difficulty about housing the men. Rations were
also plentiful and a spring of fresh water was nearby.
"I know this part of the country well," Sojan told
his men that night, "the inhabitants are for the most
part friendly. While they are not civilised, they are
not savages and I believe that they will give us some
help. But now we sleep and tomorrow we shall
rouse the tribes!"
Next morning, Sojan with a small party of his men
set off for the village of his barbarian friends.
The chief greeted him warmly and was interested
in Sojan's need for soldiers.
"You know me and my people, Soyin," he said,
using the nearest Poltoonian equivalent of Sojan's
name. "We all love to fight-and if there's a bit of
loot thrown in, who's to say 'no'?"
"Then I can depend on you?"
"By all means-I shall form a council immediately
and recruit as many of my fellow chiefs as possible.
Between us we should muster a few thousand fighting
men."
By Zylorian standards, where most nations are
comparatively small to Earth nations, a thousand
men is quite a large number.
"Then have them ready by the third day, my
friend," Sojan replied. "Blood will stain the usurper's
robes before the month is gone!"
4. The Hordes Attack
THE DAY of the invasion was drawing nearer and
Sojan began to work harder and harder in the training
of his barbarian horde-the Poltoonians. Spies
brought word that there was more and more unrest
in the outlying provinces of Hatnor.
"The time is right to strike," Sojan told his captains
and the wild chiefs. "We must invade now or
our cause will be lost and we will never again have
the opportunity to win Hatnor back from the usurper
and restore Nornos Kad to his rightful throne!"
His airships, camouflaged by the mighty trees of
the steaming Poltoonian jungle, were provisioned
and ready to do battle. His captains were word-
perfect in his plan of invasion. Everyone had his
orders and knew how to carry them out.
A day later a horde, consisting of thousands of
mounted barbarians led by Sojan himself, moved
towards the North-and Hatnor!
Two days later, the faster moving airships rose
into the air like a swarm of hornets armed with
stings a hundred times more powerful. As they passed
the horde, the ships slowed to minimum speed and
followed, flying low, just above them. In another
day they would arrive at the boundaries of Hatnorand
blood would run in the gutters of all who opposed
them.
Sojan was sure that very little blood would flow as
the army would be on his side. It was the criminal
population, egged on by an evil and power-mad
noble, who had risen and overthrown their Emperor
while the bulk of his army was crushing a rebellion
in an outer province.
There would always be unrest in any regime. Sojan
knew this, but there was no cause for the people to
grumble about their ruler. As always, the unrest had
been caused by a powerseeker intent on turning a
nation into a blood-bath for his own selfish ends.
Now the once happy people groaned beneath the
tyrant's yoke, no man, woman or child could count
themselves safe from his oppression.
Not only men made up the barbarian army, their
maidens rode beside them, armed with knife, sword,
shield and spear. In their left hands they carried
charm sticks to keep their men and themselves from
harm. Most of these girls were extremely beautiful
and the armour they wore did not detract from their
good looks in any way, rather it enhanced them.
At last they reached the outer boundaries of the
Empire and found little opposition here. It would be
later, when news of their invasion reached the city
of Hatnor, that the fighting would begin. Sojan was
finding it difficult to keep the barbarians in order;
they had decided that anyone could be slain as long
as they got their loot. But after a council meeting
with the chiefs he was sure that they would be
reliable for a time.
Two days later found them at the gates of Vermlot,
gates which were securely locked and guarded.
The barbarians were all for laying violent siege to
the place, but Sojan realised that they could hold out
for an eternity.
"You are forgetting our ships," he said, "we have
the whole of the Hatnorian airforce under our control.
They will not last as long as they hope!"
His flagship sailed gracefully down for him and
then shot up again when he was aboard. Orders
were shouted from ship to ship and the fleet dipped
downwards towards the great city square. Aboard were
hundreds of soldiers, the most reliable of the barbarian
horde, and as soon as the ships reached the
ground, not without some opposition, they swarmed
from the ships and ran to engage the rather frightened
militia who barred their way.
Wild cries, strangely woven banners raised against
a background of flashing steel and muffled poppings
of the airpistols and rifles. It was impossible to use
the heavier artillery.
Into the square they poured and soon it was impossible
to tell friend or foe as the fighting surged
back and forth, spreading outwards into the streets,
into the very houses themselves. Attacked from the
inside as well as at their walls, the tyrant's men were
uncertain whom to attack and while they wavered,
the barbarians took the opportunity to batter in one
of the minor gateways and clamber over the inner
wall.
The streets were slippery with blood, echoing with
the ring of steel and the cries of the wounded.
Sojan was in front, hewing and hacking with his
great blade, his long hair streaming behind him and
a grim smile upon his lips. "To the Palace, to the
Palace," he cried. "Take the Palace or our cause is
lost!"
And, like a tidal wave, the army surged over their
enemies in the direction of the great Palace. The
doors would not open to their thunderous knocking
so battering rams were brought in. As the main door
flew open, Sojan and his men drew back in horror.
There stood Nornos Kad, their ruler, worn and in
rags, a filthy stubble on his face. And surrounding
him, a body of Trewin's personal guard. Behind
them stood their leader.
"Come another step closer, Sojan, and I'll be forced
to kill your precious Emperor!" he called.
Sojan and his men were in a quandary, what were
they to do? It was checkmate, if not defeat, for them.
An idea sprang into Sojan's mind.
Aiming a pistol at Nornos Kad, he pulled the
trigger. The Emperor fell to the ground with a moan
and lay still.
"There, dog, I've done your dirty work for you!"
he laughed.
In a rage Trewin fired blindly at Sojan. The Swordsman
flung himself to the ground and the bullet whistled
by to catch one of his men in the shoulder.
Lifting his own pistol, Sojan fired twice. Trewin,
in the act of fleeing up the staircase, flung up his
arms and toppled down the great stairway, blood
trickling from his mouth. He landed with a thud at
the feet of his guards.
With a cry, Sojan, his sword glistening in the light
of the torches suspended around the wall, charged
for the astounded guards who, without thinking,
threw down their weapons and fled.
Nornos Kad picked himself up from the floor with
Sojan's help.
"A clever move, Sojan," he grinned, "but it took
some clever shooting, too."
He examined the hole which Sojan's bullet had
made in his coat.
"It was a minor risk, sir. If I had not taken it, the
city would even now be in the hands of Trewin."
"At the moment it seems to be in the hands of
your Poltoonian barbarians," laughed the War Lord.
"Let us go to the rescue of our fellow countrymen."
Peace had come once more to Hatnor.
5. The Purple Galley
To DESCRIBE the wonderful pageantry, the colours,
the races and the myriad weapons which flashed in
that great hall would be impossible. The gleaming
white stones of the hall, hung with vivid tapestries
of red, black, gold, yellow, orange, green and purple,
almost reflected the equally scintillating colours
of the uniforms and dresses of the men and women
who stood before the throne of Nornos Kad.
But there was one uniform missing, one tall figure
which should have been there was not, one sword
did not flash in the great hall.
And the faces of the nobles were sad-for the
missing man was Nornos Rique, Prince of Hatnorthe
War Lord's son.
"My people," said Nornos Kad, softly and very
sadly, "my son has been missing for thirteen days
now and still no news of him or the Princess Asderma.
Has anyone anything to report-you, Sojan, have
you found any traces of my son?"
"No, sire, although I have searched the whole
nation. I can only conclude that your son is not in
the Hatnorian Empire!"
"Then we must find him, Sojan! Take the men
you require-and return with my son! If it is possible
then you are the man to find him!"
The sun was just setting when a weary and travelstained
rider guided his myat into the small collection
of stone and wooden buildings which was the
border town of Erm. He had ridden for days, stopping
only to eat and gather a few hours' sleep when
he could no longer stay awake. His clothes were
good and were mainly made of durable hide. His
weapons nestled in well-oiled sheaths and scabbards,
his shield was covered with canvas. It was easy to
see that here was the typical soldier of fortune-a
Zylorian mercenary.
He dismounted at the small tavern and called
through the door which was ajar.
"Hey there! Is there a stable for my animal and a
bed for me?"
"Yes, my lord," came a woman's voice from the
tavern and a girl of about eighteen appeared in the
doorway. "Hey, Kerk!" she called. "Fetch a blanket
for this gentleman's myat and take him to the stables!"
"This way my lord," said the battle-scarred veteran
who came to do the woman's bidding. "What's
trade like?" he added with a grin as they neared the
wooden building which served as a stable for the
beasts of the whole village.
"Not too bad," the mercenary smiled. "As long as
men are men and their tempers are the same then
I'll never be out of a job. There was an uprising in
Hatnor some months ago. That was a good scrap if
ever there was one!"
"Aye, I heard about it from another gentleman
who came this way soon after it happened. Didn't
say much, though-most untalkative type if you ask
me! He wasn't a Hatnorian-nor a Northerner for
that matter, that was easy to see!"
"What do you mean?" The mercenary was obviously
interested; more than casually so.
"He was a Shortani man, you can't mistake'em."
"Shortani's a big continent-did you hear him say
what country in Shortani?"
"Wait a minute. I believe he did say something."
The old man paused and tugged at his grizzled beard.
He frowned, thinking hard. "Yes, I've got it-it was
raining at the time. Like it does most of the time in
these parts," Kerk laughed-"Never seems to stop it
don't . . ."
"Yes," the mercenary was impatient, "but what
did he say?"
"What? Oh, yes. The country. Well, he said, when
he got here, that it was 'never like this in Uffjir!' Yes,
that was it."
"Uffjir, hmm, that's right on the farthest side of
Shortani. And even then he may not have been
returning there. It probably isn't anything but it seems
strange for an Uffjirian to travel so far from his tropical
lands, especially in winter. What did he look like,
this man?"
"Oh! The usual type, you know. Small, a bit fat,
wore one of them fancy jewelled swords which snaps
as soon as you cross it with a good bit of Turani
steel. Why, I remember when I was a young'unthat
would have been a bit before your time. We
didn't have none of them newfangled flying machines
in those days, I can tell you. We had to do
all our travelling by myat-or more likely on our
feet..."
"Yes!" The mercenary was almost crying with impatience
by this time. "But can you describe the
Uffjirian?" '
"Well, he had a beard if that's any good. And it
was curled up a bit-looked as if he'd put oil on it.
Wore fancy clothes, too, no good for travelling but
expensive-yes, they were certainly expensive. He
was a nobleman by the look of him-hired a whole
crowd of the village men and they all went off together
somewhere. They ain't back yet."
"Have you any idea where they went?"
"Only the direction. They went off in the opposite
direction to the one from which you came. Mounted,
too, and although they wouldn't admit it, every one
of them has a sword hidden in his blankets. They
can't fool me, I have to look after their myats!"
The myat had been rubbed down and was in his
stable by this time, attended by the two men, one an
aged veteran with over a hundred years of fighting
behind him and the other equally a veteran with not
much more than twenty years behind him. They
lived short lives on Zylor for most men died of a
sword thrust by the time they were seventy or eighty.
Their life span of 120 years was rarely reached.
That night, the mercenary sat in the corner of the
tavern, drinking and cleaning his heavy pistol. There
were two other visitors at the tavern. A young man
of seventeen years or so and his father. They were
friendly men and the mercenary and he found mutual
ground in that they were both veterans of the
Findian/Kintonian wars. The mercenary had fought
for the Findians and the man-Orfil-had fought on
the side of the Kintonians. But there was no bad
feeling between the men for at that time Orfil had
also been a mercenary. Now he was a merchantdealing
in precious jewels-and he and his son were
travelling to Aborgmingi, a small group of islands in
the Shortani Sea. The mining of precious stones was
unknown there, he said, and he found it worth his
while to travel the distance over land and sea to sell
them as they obtained prices which were over five
times as much as those in Fria, his own country.
"Ride with us," he invited, "there is always a
greater amount of safety if there is a greater amount
of men and I would be glad of your company."
"I ride towards Shortani," said Sojan, "but whether
I shall for long depends on circumstances."
The merchant knew better than to ask what "circumstances"
they were for privacy means life on
Zylor and those who ask too many needless questions
are liable to find themselves in an alleyway
keeping close company with a knife!
The three men retired to their respective rooms
and the mercenary was glad to get some rest. Wearily
he sank on to the not-so-soft bed and lay down
to sleep.
In the morning he awoke at his accustomed hour
and attempted to rise. He could not, for his hands
were bound. He was strapped to the bed and the
only thing he could move was his head. Looking
down at him with a smile on his face was-Orfil the
merchant, and his son. Only his "son" had donned
her skirts again and was an extremely pretty girl!
"Well, my nosy soldier, you've put your nose into
one game too many this time!" laughed Orfil, who
seemed to be enjoying a great joke. The girl behind
him was not so amused. Her whole bearing was
tense and the hand that gripped the pistol at her
side gleamed white at the knuckles.
"Perhaps I should introduce myself," continued
the man. "my name is Orfil. I am the Captain of the
Spies Guild in Rhan. This lady prefers to. remain
unknown, although where you're going the gods
will know it anyway!"
"You're going to kill me then?"
"Yes."
"And am I permitted to enquire 'why'?"
"Certainly. I am afraid that I shall be forced to kill
you-though I regret it, sir, for I like you. You see,
you have been enquiring just a little too pointedly to
be harmless. I suspect that you are more than a
common mercenary-that perhaps you are in the
pay of Uffjir-and if this is so, then it will be more
of a pleasure to kill you!"
"I am no Uffjirian, you oaf! And I am not involved
in any intrigue. I seek my War Lord's son who
disappeared some time ago! Think not that I would
sink so low as you!"
The smile vanished from the Rhanian's face and
his right hand clenched on his long sword.
"Then I am sorry! You see Nornos Rique is in this
right up to his lance-tip!"
And with that, he raised his sword. The girl turned
away, and just as Orfil was about to deal the death
thrust, the door opened slowly and he saw the face
of the Uffjirian nobleman. Behind him were half a
dozen burly swordsmen.
"Yit take you, Parijh!" cried the spy and then to
the girl, "Quick, get behind me and open the window.
I'll hold them back. There are myats awaiting!"
And with that he rushed upon the Uffjirian who,
for a moment was so taken aback that he could
hardly defend himself from the furious attack of
Orfil's sword.
"Quick men," he yelled, "seize him, kill him, don't
let him escape!" But the narrow doorway would not
permit more than one man to enter at a time and
Orfil easily pushed Parijh back and swung the heavy
bar into position as the door shut.
"No time to slay you now," he panted as he
clambered over the window ledge, "perhaps some
other time ..."
The girl had by this time scrambled from the window
and was waiting with the myats. The soft thud
of their hooves was drowned by the yells of the man
from Uffjir and the surly answers of his companions.
Silence fell as the men gave chase to Orfil and the
girl. The mercenary still lay strapped to the bed. The
door was barred from the inside and he had begun
to think that he would soon starve to death when
someone knocked on the door.
"Get me out of here!" he yelled.
"Is there anything the matter, sir?"
This was too much even for a hardened warrior.
"Yes there is!" he roared. "And if you don't let me
out right now-I'll tear the place down with my bare
hands!" A rather vain boast considering his position.
Murmurs at the door and the retracing of steps
down the creaking staircase.
He waited expectantly, hearing occasional voices.
Then there were tramping feet on the stairway and
in a few moments the door fell inwards, closely
followed by two men with a battering log and behind
them old Kerk.
"I said there was something up!" he exclaimed
triumphantly.
It was a matter of minutes to untie the mercenary,
for him to gather up his accoutrements, to pay Kerk
and to find and saddle his myat. Then he was off,
down the long forest track, following the trail of
Orfil and his pursuers.
For three hours he followed a trail which was
easily found. Once or twice he thought he heard
movements in the forest but, although he kept his
hand ever ready on his sword, he was not attacked.
Then, just as he turned the bend in the trail, they
were there. The Uffjirian's men, lined across the
narrow path, swords drawn and pikes at the ready.
But the mercenary was trained to quick thinking
and at the same moment as his heels dug into his
myat's flanks, he drew sword, unhooked shield and
brought his lance to bear as he thundered down
upon his foes, his crimson cloak flying behind him
like a vampire's wings soaked in blood, and a bloodcurdling
war-shout on his lips!
Taken aback, they wavered, but at the Uffjirian's
shouts behind them, pushed forward to meet the
charging lancer. Down went one with a brilliantly
tufted shaft protruding from his throat. The lance
was wrenched out of the mercenary's hands and his
steed reared and snorted, flailing with its cloven
hooves. His face was alight with battle-lust, he ducked
beneath the guard of another man and dealt him a
cut which put him down, shrieking and calling to
some unknown god in an agony of death. He whirled
his steed about, hoping to gain a little ground by
retreating, but it was too late, for he was surrounded
by a solid ring of pikes and blue steel. He caught
blow after blow on his shield and the flat of his
sword. One man lunged upwards with his heavy
pike and the myat snorted in pain before his deadly
hooves beat the man down.
Leaping from the wounded myat, the lone swordsman
found himself surrounded by four of Parijh's
men. He bled from a dozen superficial cuts and still
he fought with the skill and ferocity of a trained
crinja cat. Then there was a gap in their ranks and he
was through, rushing for a tethered myat twenty
yards away.
Howling like were-wolves, they followed him across
the glade and reached him just as he cut the tethering
rope of the myat with his sword and leaped into
the high saddle. They attempted to cut at his animal's
legs but a swift arc of blue steel drove them
back. As he passed the body of the man whom he
had first slain, he stooped and wrenched the lance
from the corpse and then he was away, down the
long trail in the direction Orfil had taken. All his
would-be captors heard was a grim laugh which
echoed through the tall trees of the forest.
Turning in the saddle, the mercenary saw them
run to their mounts and Parijh come from behind,
scolding and cursing-for among other things, the
fine beast the mercenary had taken had belonged to
the Uffjirian!
And it soon proved its worth for he easily outdistanced
them and was again following Orfil's tracks-a
trail which was to lead to the weirdest adventure in
his whole career.
6. The Sea Wolves!
Two DAYS after his fight with the Uffjirian's men, the
mercenary rode into the port of Minifjar in the country
of Barj.
There were several ships in the harbour. Merchantmen
mainly, but here and there rose the tall
prows of warships.
Although their airships are motor-powered, the
Zylorians have not found an engine capable of moving
their ships, or for carrying them for very far and,
since steam-power also is unknown, they still rely
on sails and oars for motive power.
Most of the ships were equipped with both sails
and oars but two of them were built for sails only.
From every one of them, long barrels poked from
strategic ports, for it was only a suicidal madman
who would sail anything but the calm waters of the
Asnogi Channel and the Shortani Sea unarmed.
There was one ship, a galley, which stood out
from the others. Its tall prow triumphantly above the
rest and its sails and paintwork were predominantly
purple. Purple, like black on Earth, is the colour of
death on Zylor, so it attracted much attention from
the inhabitants of the small town.
The mercenary sought out the only presentable
inn and bought a meal and a bed for the night.
As he lugged his equipment wearily up the flight
of narrow stairs, he looked up and caught a glimpse
of a familiar face-that of Orfil of Rhan's girl companion.
Evidently she had been watching him and the
warrior kept a wary hand on his sword and resolved
to make sure that his door was firmly barred that
night.
But soon after he had dumped his belongings on
the dirty bed, he heard the rattle of harness and,
from his small window, he saw the spy and the girl
leaving the walled entrance to the inn-they had
none of their possessions with them which told the
mercenary a great deal. They had gone for reinforcements.
He sat on the edge of the bed pondering
what he should do.
He had decided that it would be wiser to leave,
when there came the sound of myat's hooves and a
squad of Barjite Cavalry, fully armed with lances,
swords, long rifles and pistols, clad in uniforms of
blue, red and green with shining breastplates, helmets
and leg greaves of bright steel. They clattered
to a halt outside the inn.
"Thank Yit!" the mercenary murmured. For he
recognised the captain of the mounted men as an
old friend, who had fought beside him in an expedition
Barj had made when bandits had been raiding
their caravans of merchandise.
"Red," he cried, opening the window. "Red, you
son of a crinja cat!"
Red, or as his men knew him, Captain Jeodvir,
Vollitt's son of Chathja, turned. Then, as he saw
who called him, a wide grin took the place of his
previously astonished expression and he passed a
hand through the shock of hair which gave him his
nickname.
"Sojan! What are you doing in this particular bit of
Hell?"
"And you? One of King Vixian's crack lancers
commanding a coast patrol!"
"The king doesn't like me any more, Sojan,"
laughed the warrior. "Not since I pressed for better
pay for the cavalry and nearly started a civil war at
the last council!"
It was Sojan's turn to laugh. "You couldn't plead
for better conditions for the underpaid infantry, I
suppose!"
"What? And have them get the idea that they're
up to cavalry standard!"
The rivalry between infantry and mounted divisions
in Barj was very real and at times became a
threat to the internal peace of that nation. The brawls
between the better trained cavalry (generally inheriting
the right to become an officer) and the recruited
infantry were cursed in every town from Erm to
Ishtam-Zhem, the capital. But Sojan was not concerned
with this, he had an ally now, no need to
run, he could stay and fight like a man.
"Looking for a fight, Red?" he said.
"Dying to be killed, why?" enquired Red, using
an expression which was currently popular among
fighting men.
"Because I have a feeling that we will be in one
soon!"
"Good, I'll tell my men to be prepared."
"Thanks, I'll need some help, I think."
"Unusual for you to admit that!"
"Shut up, I'm coming down."
In the courtyard of the inn, Sojan told Red what
he knew about Orfil and what had happened to him
since he left the court of Hatnor to search for his
ruler's son.
And as he finished, Orfil and a band of some
twenty mounted men in seamen's clothes, rode into
the courtyard. The captain's squad consisted of ten
men-so they were outnumbered almost two-to-one.
The seamen had no lances but the cavalry had left
their rifles, pistols and lances with their myats' sad-
dles and other equipment. Now they were armed
only with long sabres (or vilthors) and small battleaxes.
It took Orfil less than a second to take stock of the
situation and with a curse, he bore down upon the
group, yelling a blasphemous battle-shout so full of
evil that it made Sojan's hair tingle. His men followed
him, hardened sea-wolves these, all of them
by rights fodder for the executioner's axe. Scarred,
wild-eyed men in exotic clothes of many hues and
nations. Black, green, white and red. From every
nation on Zylor, they bore weapons which were
equally varied-battle-axes, maces, pikes, hooked
swords and broadswords, vilthors and blades resembling
scimitars. All were there, and many so strange
that they defied simple description.
Sojan blocked Orfil's lance thrust with his own
long sword and unslung his shield from his back in
a hurry. But not soon enough, for Orfil's lance stabbed
again and flung the mercenary backward against a
wall. Luckily, the lance tip broke on Sojan's breastplate
and Orfil swore to his dark gods as he wheeled
his steed about and attempted to cut at Sojan with
his broadsword. But now Sojan was up again, back
against the wall, shield up and blade screaming as
he cut past Orfil's guard.
But Orfil was swept away as the fight eddied back
and forth across the courtyard. There, a green man
of Poltoon went down with a lancer on top of him,
stabbing again and again. Near him a huge red man,
bearded, with one of his small horns broken and
splintered, staggered towards his tethered steed spitting
blood from a punctured lung-he never made
the myat. A lancer was crushed by sheer weight of
numbers as four howling, long-haired black men from
Shortani bore him down and almost tore him to
pieces. Everywhere was chaos and Sojan hardly knew
who it was he fought, there were so many of them.
Finally he singled out another red giant who whirled
a shrieking twin-bladed axe around his head and
laughed through his black beard all the time. He
bled from a flesh wound in his left arm and his face
streamed blood from a superficial sword cut, but he
never seemed to tire. Sojan caught a blow of the axe
on his shield which dented so much that it almost
broke his arm. Discarding it he skipped nimbly away
from the arc of blood-stained steel, ducked beneath
it and ripped upwards with a thrust that caught the
giant in the throat and threw him groaning to the
cobbles before Sojan lost sight of him as a fresh
wave of sea-spoilers pushed towards him.
The war-shout of his people was upon Sojan's lips
and it rose above the screams and curses of the men,
spurred Red and his men on to greater feats of
magnificent swordsmanship until the sailors were
driven back. Slowly, very slowly, they gave ground
and just as victory seemed in the hands of Sojan and
his allies, from the courtyard walls dropped scores
of well-armoured axemen.
It was impossible to defend themselves against
this sudden onslaught and the last thing Sojan heard
as an axe haft fell on his helmet and blackness followed
blinding light was:
"Take them alive. They will suffer more tonight!"
7. Sojan at Sea
SOJAN AWOKE with a piercing pain in his head which
quickly disappeared. Looking about him he found
that he was lying on a comfortable couch in a well
furnished room which seemed to have an indefinable
"something" wrong with it.
Then he realised what it was. Every article of
furniture was clamped to the floor and the windows
were small square openings in the walls, just below
eye-level.
He was in a ship's cabin. Obviously one of the
ships in the harbour-that was why the men who
had attacked him had worn seafaring garb. Which
ship though? He didn't know. Doubtless he would
find out soon enough. Could it be the purple ship of
death which swayed at anchor in Minifjar harbour?
It was likely, this business was mysterious enough
for anything.
He walked over to the port hole and looked out.
No, the purple ship could be seen from there. Then
what ship was this?
He went back to the couch after trying the door
which he found locked as he had expected.
He waited an hour-a long hour-until the bar on
the door was lifted with a creak and the door swung
open.
To his surprise, he found himself staring into the
face of Parijh, the Ufffjirian who said:
"Welcome aboard the Sea Crinja my friend!"
But the man who stood behind Parijh caught the
adventurer's attention most of all. It was his War
Lord's son, Nornos Rique of Hatnor!
"Shiltain!" swore Sojan when he saw him.
"What-?"
"Explanation later, Sojan, we were lucky to rescue
you. Right now you're not very welcome. My fault, I
suppose, for giving no hint that I would be goingbut
there was no time."
"But how did I get out of Orfil's hands?"
"It's a long story-too long to relate here. Meanwhile,
we sail for the Sea of Demons!"
"What?"
"We're sailing dangerous waters Sojan, for we
play a dangerous game in which the whole planet is
at stake. Do you want to come on deck?"
"Thanks."
The three men climbed the long ladders to the
poopdeck. Nornos Rique shouted orders as sails were
set and men moved to their oars. All the men were
well built fighting men.
Sojan looked back to where the huge purple galley
swayed at anchor like a dead ship becalmed in the
terrible weed jungle of the Black Ocean. She gave no
signs of following and soon the sails were billowing,
oars creaked in unison and they were on the open
sea, bound for the mysterious Sea of Demons.
Like all ships, there was continual movement
aboard. Men scurrying up and down the rigging,
guns oiled and cleaned, the shouts of the mate giving
orders.
The ship comprised three decks. Two raised fore
and aft and a middle deck which was little more
than a raised platform over the oarsmen's pits on
port and starboard. In the centre of this deck there
was another slightly raised platform measuring about
thirty feet upon which was the single mast. At the
base of this mast a drummer sat-beating out a steady
rhythm which was followed by the oars who took
their timing from the drum.
On this platform, also, was the heavy artillery and
something which Sojan had never seen beforeharpoon
guns, twelve of them, five a side and another
two fore and aft.
It was obvious that peaceful trading with the tribes
along the Shortani coast was not the object of this
particular voyage.
Suddenly, Sojan remembered his comrades.
"What happened to my friends?" he asked.
"They're all aboard the Purple Arrow, that cursed
ship of Death you saw in Minifjar harbour," answered
Rique. "You see, Sojan, we only had time to
free you before we were discovered. My men and I
swam across and boarded her silently last night. We
finally found you and, judging by your snores, you
were in a drugged sleep. There were four others
with you but they were so much dead weight that
we could only take you and secretly leave knives in
their shirts with which to aid themselves if they
have the chance. I'm sorry, Sojan, but it is too late to
go back for them now even if it were practical."
"You are right, of course, Rique," answered Sojan,
"but I would that I could help them!"
Now the tall Sea Crinja was in open waters, beyond
sight of land. Bound for the terrible Sea of Demons
where few ships ever sailed-and returned. And, in
the days they sailed towards their destination, Sojan
pieced together the ominous tale of the Old Ones
and how the Priests of Rhan sought to conquer Zylor
with their evil aid.
It seemed that word of the plot was brought to
Uffjir first. This country lies due North of Rhan on
the Shortani coast and is generally better informed
about the island of Mystery as it is sometimes called
than is the rest of Zylor.
The Uffjirian monarch, King Ashniophil, had feared
to make public the news as it would very likely force
the Rhanian priesthood into swifter action. Instead,
he had sent a messenger to enlist Nornos Rique's aid
as, if the worst ever happened, Hatnor was the most
powerful country on the whole planet. Nornos Rique,
naturally, had not thought it wise to notify his father
at once as he knew the other's aptitude to make
quick, but sometimes hasty decisions and this is
what Uffjir was trying to prevent.
Unfortunately, at the time of the messenger's coming,
the Princess Asderma had been with Rique and
had overheard everything. She threatened to betray
Nornos Rique to the Rhanians unless he paid her a
fabulous amount of money.
Knowing that even when she had the money, she
would be dangerous, Rique decided to go into hiding.
He had had to kidnap the girl and ride for Rhan
in an effort to come to terms with the rulers or, if
this failed, destroy or capture their leaders and their
strange unhuman allies.
After several detours, he finally reached Minifjar
but not before the Princess had escaped and fled to
Orfil who had promptly ridden for Minifjar himself
where a ship (one of the purple fleet of the Rhanian
Theocracy-or Priest Rulers) awaited him in case
just such an emergency as this should occur. The
mercenary's questions had aroused his interest when
he had overheard them at the inn and he had taken
Sojan prisoner. Only to be foiled by the Uffjirian
messenger who was acting as a rear-guard for Nornos
Rique. The rest Sojan knew.
Now it was a race to get to Rhan first.
8. The Sea of Demons
IT WAS a race to get to Rhan first. The Purple Arrow
would take the comparatively safe way there by sail-
ing down the coast of Poltoon until safer waters
were reached (namely the Poltoonian Ocean) and
back to Rhan via these waters.
The Crinja, however, would attempt to sail through
the Demon Sea, cutting off a considerable part of the
distance. They knew little of what they had to fight
against. The Arrow did not know of their plan and
was relying on the greater speed to catch the Crinja
and either destroy it or beat it to Rhan and have it
destroyed then. If the Crinja could reach Rhan first,
it would have several days start and the fate of the
world would be decided in those days. Why the
Arrow had not sailed earlier, they knew not, but
guessed that they were waiting for someone.
It was a day's sail until they would reach the
Demon Sea and in that time, Sojan got to know his
companions better.
Parijh, the Uffjirian, proved to be a humorous
man. Cheerful in the face of every danger they had
had to meet. When necessary, he was an excellent
swordsman, but preferred to keep out of what he
called 'unnecessary brawling'. This often gained him
a reputation of cowardliness but, as he said, it was
an asset rather than otherwise, for what better opponent
is there than the one who underestimates you?
Sojan had to agree with this statement and a strong
feeling of comradeship and mutual respect grew between
them as they sailed ever nearer to the Sea of
Demons.
Nornos Rique himself captained the Crinja. Rique
was a tall man with a face that, though not handsome,
had a dependable and rock-hard ruggedness
and eyes of steel grey.
The mate was, as is usual on Zylorian naval craft,
either privateer or part of an authorised Navy, a
cavalry captain by the name of Andel of Riss who,
although inclined to make independent decisions
without consulting anyone first, was a good man in
any kind of fight, and worth four of any man in the
crew, who were all fine men and who admired him
and respected him as only seamen can respect a
man. They would also prove this in a fight with man
or the elements.
The custom of placing cavalry men as seconds-incommand
of ships is not as strange as it seems and
the custom evolved thus:
At one time in the not-so-ancient history of Zylor
a strong rivalry developed between seamen and
landsmen. It became so bad that if a war came, the
land forces could never rely on the naval forcesand
vice versa.
It was the idea of assigning landsmen to learn the
ways of the sea and naval officers to get to know the
cavalry and infantry that saved them from chaos,
and nowadays the two forces worked together in
perfect harmony.
Later, on the evening of the third day out of Minifjar
they were sailing a sea which was similar to any
other sea but which, according to the maps, was the
feared Sea of Demons.
"We'd better anchor here and sail on at daybreak,"
Nornos Rique decided, and he gave the order to
drop anchor. The anchor chain rattled down for several
seconds before stopping with a jarring clank.
"Water's too deep, sir! Anchor won't take!" yelled
Andel.
"Then we daren't drift. Ship oars and set sail on
your course."
"Yes, sir!"
Night fell forming an atmosphere of decay and
death which could almost be smelled or touched.
But apart from this, nothing happened save a faint
scraping from time to time along the side of the boat
which was attributed to some heavy sea-weed or a
piece of drift wood.
The twin suns rose and the green dawn came,
sending shadows and atmosphere scurrying over the
horizon. The sea was green and shone like dark jade
with some of jade's intangible mistiness.
Oars smashed into it, ploughing it in bright foamflecked
furrows, and the monotonous beat of the
drum began.
Sojan and his comrades ate breakfast in an atmosphere
of gloom.
"It's this confounded sea!" suddenly roared Andel,
rising from his chair and crashing his fist into his
open palm. "Yit! By the time this voyage is over,
there'll be men's lives lost and most likely we'll all
be on the bottom!"
"Calm down, Andel, we'll come to any danger
when we get to it," Nornos Rique said.
Andel grunted sullenly and subsided.
Two depressed hours followed until:
"Yit take us!"
This oath was followed by a piercing scream which
tailed off into a choking gasp.
The four men rushed on deck. Most of the crew
were at the starboard rail, staring downward to where
a red foam flecked the white.
"Turn back, sir, you must turn back!" One hysterical
seaman rushed towards Nornos Rique screaming.
"Calm down, and tell me what happened!"
Fear was in the man's eyes. A terrible fear bordering
on madness. He babbled out his tale.
"A-a thing,-sir-it crept up on Mitesh and-oh,
sir-it grabbed him by the throat and jumped overboard!"
"Is that all?"
"It's enough, sir!" muttered another of the men.
"What did this 'thing' look like? Who saw it
clearly?"
"I did, sir."
It was the man who had commented a second
before.
"Well?"
"It was a kind of green and brown. Scaly. By Yit,
sir, it looked like a man might look if his mother had
been a fish!"
"You mean this animal was-human?"
"Not human, sir. But it had a man's body sure
enough. And his face was pointed, like, sir. And his
eyes-his eyes were green, like the rest of him, and
seemed to rot you when he stared at you!"
"All right. Thank you. Take this man below and
give him something to drink!"
"Yes sir. Do we turn back?"
"No! You all knew there was danger!"
"Danger, yes sir, but not from-from devils!"
"Get below-we sail on!"
Back in their cabin, Sojan spoke.
"I've heard old folktales, Rique, about occurrences
such as this one. Now I know why the ancients
called this the 'Sea of Demons'."
"Do you think they are-organised in any way?"
"I've never heard of them being anything but in
large numbers!"
"Perhaps this was a warning, then?"
"I think it might have been."
"We'd better set all guns in readiness. Those harpoons
will come in useful. I had them mounted in
case of meeting any of those large saurians that
inhabit the Poltoonian Ocean. But it looks as if they'll
be needed for a different 'game' now!"
The ship's oars began to creak again. But was the
beat of the drum less sure? Were the oars a heartbeat
slower? It seemed to the men standing on the
poopdeck that this was so.
Towards the middle of the day, the atmosphere of
death grew and suddenly from the sea on four sides
of the vessel the weird inhabitants of the Sea of
Demons rose and attempted to board them.
But this time they were ready and the guns sent
forth a steady stream of deadly missiles, driving the
shrieking horde back into the sea.
"They went quickly enough!" yelled Andel jubilantly.
"Too quickly. They'll be more wary next time and
they'll be back at night for sure!"
And night did fall and with it strange sounds
which rose from the water and chilled the blood of
the men on board.
But this time the crew were prepared and their
searchlights stabbed the gloom, picking out the grotesque
figures of the sea-people.
The crew moved forward, their yells mingling with
the strange hissing cries of the sea-people. Sabres
flashed in the searchlight glare and the blood of
seamen and the man-like monsters mingled on the
deck, making it difficult to get a footing.
The ship was a contrast of glaring light and total
blackness. Men leaped from shadow into blinding
gleam or disappeared into murky darkness. Men's
breath was streaming in the cold night air. Men's
battle cries pierced the shadows where light failed.
And Sojan and his companions were in the thick of
it, their swords lashing this way and that at their
inhuman adversaries. Sojan's war-cry spurred on the
men and slowly, then swiftly, they pushed them
back and the body of the last monster to invade their
ship crashed over the rail to splash into the murky
waters below.
There was an audible sigh from the sweating men.
"We've pushed 'em back once, lads, and by Yit,
we'll push them back from here to Rhan if needs
be!" cried Sojan. With the thrill of victory still in
their hearts, their pulses tingling with conquest, the
men's voices rose in assent.
A brief count found two sailors suffering from
wounds where the talons of the sea-people had ripped
them, while three more men were missing, obviously
dragged down by the sea-people.
"We should reach Rhan in a day," said Nornos
Rique.
"Or the bottom," broke in Andel gloomily.
But the monotonous day ahead was broken only
by the screaming of sea-birds as they passed the
outlying islands of The Immortal Theocracy of Rhan
as it was called. This "immortal theocracy" was little
more than Rhan itself and a group of four islands
inhabited mainly by primitive tribes, most of whom
dwelt in the interior, anyway, and had probably
never heard of Rhan.
As they neared Rhan, Sojan felt misgivings. Would
they succeed in carrying out their plan? Or would
their perilous journey be in vain.
It was with these odd questions in his mind that
he followed his friends down the gangplank and
down a series of narrow lanes to a private house
owned by a society known to those few holding
positions of trust in the Hatnorian Empire, as the
"Friends of Hatnor." These "friends" were generally
native Hatnorians carrying forged or, as in some
cases, real papers giving assumed names as well as
assumed nationalities.
Three long knocks and two short ones three times
repeated gained them admission.
As they walked along the narrow corridor to the
main living room they began to feel just a little more
secure, even though they were deep in the heart of
the enemy's city-Jhambeelo.
But as the door swung open and friendly light
flooded into the dark corridor they were taken aback!
"Hullo, Sojan," grinned Red. "I don't think I've
met your friends?"
"By Yit! Red, how did you get here before us?"
cried Sojan.
"Simple. I flew!"
"What? No airship could make the distance."
"You're quite right. I didn't come by airship. Banjar,
here, brought me!"
For the first time, the comrades noticed what appeared
to be a hunchbacked, rather tall, man with
piercing blue eyes and aquiline features. Dark-haired,
with a swarthy complexion.
"To snap the bow in half," said Red, using a term
common on Zylor which means roughly-"To cut a
long story short," "Jik, Wanwif, Selwoon and myself
succeeded in staving a rather large hole in the bottom
of the Purple Arrow. Naturally enough, it was
not long before we were beginning to regret this as
the water was rising steadily in the hold. Then, as
we were all good swimmers, I thought that the only
way to escape drowning would be to enlarge the
hole and get out that way. So in turns we widened
the hole and, with a great deal of difficulty, pulled
ourselves under the keel of the boat and up into the
open water. We lost Wanwif, I'm sorry to say. He
didn't make it. Well, after that we found that we
would have been better off drowning in the ship as
there was no sight of land. I learned afterwards that
we were in the Black Ocean and this didn't help as
the stories I've heard of the Black Ocean are anything
but cheerful. But believe it or not, after swimming
in a Westerly direction for an hour or so, we
were picked up by a little fishing vessel, oared only,
manned by some natives of Yoomik which is the
largest of the Rhanian group next to Rhan itself.
"The people looked after us but soon we got weary
of hanging around their village and decided that an
exploratory trip into the interior of the island would
be the only thing to break the monotony. We trekked
for several days until coming upon the village of
Banjar's people-the Ascri.
"The Ascri at one time were enslaved by the
Rhanian Priesthood and still bear a grievance against
them. It was Banjar, who, when he had heard that I
believed you were going to Rhan, suggested that he
fly me there. We landed at night and made our way
here. Banjar's people are advanced in many of the
crafts and sciences and they have an asset which
helps them tremendously. Show Sojan and his friends
your asset, Banjar!"
Banjar grinned and stood up. Unfolding a pair of
huge wings.
"My people, I believe, are descended from the
ancient winged mammals who used to live on Zylor.
Just an off-shoot of evolution, I suppose. But one
which has proved of great help to my people who
can travel great distances at great speeds and although
we are few in number, we can elude any
enemies by leaving the ground and escaping that
way. As my friend says, 'It is a great asset'!"
Formal introductions were made and food eaten
but when this was finished Sojan spoke to Red.
"Have you managed to find out anything which
might prove useful to us, Red?"
"I have indeed, my friend, I have found out something
which, with your courage and skill and a great
deal of luck, will save the world from chaos!"
9. Prisoners in Stone
RED'S PLAN was simple enough. Members of the secret
society of the "Friends of Hatnor" had found an
ancient plan of the Great Temple which was both
chief place of worship and the centre of the Priesthood's
rule in Rhan. There were three tunnels leading
into it. Old sewers, long since disused. Two
were cul-de-sacs, having been walled up. But in the
last, the walling had been a hasty job and the bricks
used to seal it had collapsed. However, these tunnels
were still guarded at the other end. Some said
by Palace Guards-but others said simply that they
were guarded by "something". Even if the foe was
human it would take an incredibly brave man to
venture the rotting tunnels.
"Why not an army?" asked Andel. "Surely a great
many men would be safer than one?"
"Safer, yes, but certainly not so secret. Every action
we make must not be detected by the Priesthood-otherwise
we are lost. We can only make a
very wide guess at what power these Old Ones
wield and it is our aim to stop them using it-not
bring it down upon our heads-and the rest of the
world's heads, also."
"I see," said Parijh, "then let me be the one to go.
I offer not out of heroics-which are extremely bad
taste in any case-but I am more accustomed to
stealth than these sword-swinging barbarians with
me." He grinned.
"Ho! So that's what we are, are we?" roared Andel.
"I'll have you know ..."
But the comrades would never hear the rest of
Andel's forthcoming witticism for Red broke in: "Be
a bit quieter, Andel, or you'll have the whole of the
Rhanian Soldiery on our heads."
"Sorry," said Andel.
"No," continued Red, "I think Sojan should go.
He is better for the job than anyone else. He has
barbarian training, he is cat-footed, lynx-eyed and
can hear a sword sing in its scabbard a mile away. I
think he will succeed in getting through more than
any other man in our company!"
"Then it will be I, that's settled," said Sojan with
satisfaction. "When and where do I start?"
"You start now, and I will lead you to the entrance
of the tunnel. I suggest that you take a rifle,
an axe, your shield and your long sword. Half-armour
would be advisable, also."
"Then I shall take your advice," Sojan laughed
and proceeded to don half-armour. This consisted of
greaves for his legs, and a breastplate and helmet.
Then he was ready and prepared to follow Red
down winding backstreets to a small turning near
the Great Temple. Here, Red lifted a rusted cover to
reveal an equally rusted ladder leading down into
darkness.
"Good luck!" was all he said as Sojan slipped
down into the gloom and sought about for handand
foot-holds on the ageworn rail. Then the lid was
replaced and Sojan found himself in utter darkness.
Down he fumbled, sometimes missing footing
where one of the metal bars had rusted away, once
nearly falling when his groping hand instead of closing
on solid metal closed on damp air. But at last he
was on the uneven floor of the disused sewer, peering
into the gloom. He followed the wall along for
what seemed an eon, stumbling over fallen bricks
and refuse. At last he sensed an obstruction ahead
and he unsheathed his sword and felt the reassuring
butt of his heavy pistol in his hand. On he went,
past the fallen wall until-suddenly-there was no
more tunnel. Or so it seemed. His right hand, which
had been groping along the wall touched nothing.
But after the first brief shock he grinned to himself.
This was the right hand turn of the tunnel. Soon he
would meet the Guardians.
And meet them he did for, with a soul-shaking
shriek, two of the mysterious guardians were upon
him. Huge reptilian things, red-eyed and red-mouthed
with teeth reaching a foot long and razor sharp.
Sojan, shocked by their sudden attack, took a step
backwards, hitched his rifle to his shoulder and fired
straight into the mouth of the foremost beast. It
shrieked again but still came on. Hastily he dropped
the rifle and replaced it with his heavy axe and long
sword. But before the beast reached him it had stumbled
and fallen with crumpling forelegs, writhing in
a fit of agony which ended with one abrupt shudder
of death.
The other monster was checked for a moment,
sniffed the corpse of its companion and then voiced
another spine-chilling shriek which was half hiss and
half human cry. Sojan met it with sword lashing and
axe whining through the air about his head. Back
went the monster but it returned in an instant, clutching
at Sojan with its claws which almost resembled
human hands-though hands with six inch steel talons
on the ends of each finger. Sojan stumbled backwards,
his axe cutting and hacking at the hideous
thing, his sword slashing into its throat again and
again until at last it was down in a death agony that
lasted minutes.
Pausing to wipe his weapons clean of blood and to
pick up his rifle, Sojan moved on down the tunnel,
feeling a little more cheerful now that he knew his
foe and had conquered it.
And, abruptly, he was at the end of the runnel
and a similar steel ladder, in better condition, leading
upwards. Warily he clambered up. Rifle, axe and
shield strapped across his broad back and his sword
firmly clenched in his teeth.
There was a metal cover here, too, and he lifted it
cautiously to be blinded for a moment by the sudden
gleam. He had been so long in darkness and the
semi-darkness of the tunnel that he blinked hard for
several seconds until his eyes became accustomed to
the light.
Silently he eased his body through the narrow
hole and just as softly replaced the cover. He was in
a lighted corridor with torches on either side. The
corridor was short and had a door at each end.
Which door? He decided immediately to take the
door which led farthest away from the tunnel. At
least he would be a little deeper into the Temple and
nearer the Inner Room in the centre which housed
the Old Ones.
Gradually he pushed the door until it swung open.
He thanked the Gods of Light, Yit and Corrunj, that
they had not been locked.
Down another corridor he sped, cat-footed as ever,
wary hands on sword and rifle. His armour glinted
in the torchlight and his shadow loomed black and
huge on the wall.
Most of the priests would be at rest, he knew, but
it was equally certain that guards would be posted at
strategic points and absolute caution was necessary.
He had a rough plan of the Temple printed in his
mind but the maze of corridors which he was following
and which ran deeper and deeper into the heart
of the Temple were complicated and were probably
or more recent origin, for the map had been very old.
But cautious as he knew he must be he was certainly
not slow. For every heartbeat counted. He had
to reach the chamber of the Old Ones somehow and
discover who-or what-they were and what their
motives were for allying themselves with the evil
Priesthood of Rhan.
The murmurs of voices. The laughs of men. The
clank of sword-scabbard against armour. At last, a
guarded entrance. Was he near the strange sanctuary
of the Old Ones?
The men's backs were to him. This was not the
time for heroics, for a cry would mean discovery;
and discovery he must avoid. He raised his rifle and
brought it down on the head of one guard while
with his other hand he chopped at the back of the
other man's neck. They both collapsed without a
murmur. Looking up and down the intersecting corridor
to make sure he had not been seen, he grabbed
the two bodies by their loose clothing and pulled
them back into the shadows. No time to hide them.
And no time to hide himself. For the clank of steelshod
feet resounded down the corridor. He hugged
the wall and prayed to his ancient gods that he
would not be discovered.
Sojan heard the steps come nearer and nearer,
and then, miraculously, fade away again. Risking
discovery, he peered round the wall and saw another
passageway. Down it strode two guards and
one of the infamous High Priests of Rhan, the rulers
of the place. Cat-footed as usual, he followed them.
This corridor was not very well lighted but, unlike
the others, it had doors set in the walls.
Sojan hoped that one of these would not open.
Suddenly the priest stopped.
"Wait here," Sojan heard him say. No time to
think, now, he must act. Into the nearest apartment
and pray to Yit that it was unoccupied.
Luck! The rooms were empty. These, Sojan could
see, were the apartments of the High Priests. No
monkish sparsity of furniture here-these rooms were
lavishly furnished and decorated. Grinning, Sojan
bounced down on to the bed and breathed a prayer
of relief. Then he was up again and taking in his
surroundings. On one wall hung several of the long
flowing robes which the High Priests wore.
One of the customs of these men was to go
veiled-to give them a little more security from the
assassin, Sojan guessed-and also to enable them to
slip from the Temple and mingle with the people
without fear of being recognised. This was one of
the reasons why the people of Rhan were so easily
kept in subjection by the evil priest-Rulers.
But there was a chance, though Sojan knew it was
a slim one, that he could don one of these robes and
enter the Inner Chamber and meet the mysterious
Old Ones face to face.
Quickly he slipped into the robe, stuffing all but
his sword and pistol under a nearby couch, and
hoping that they would not be discovered. His sword
and pistol were well hidden by the folds of the robe
and he could keep his armour on.
Out now, and down the passage, past the lounging
soldiers who sprang to attention and saluted him
with the usual Zylorian salute-clenched fists against
temples and a short bow from the waist.
Sojan acknowledged the salute by a curt nod of
his head. The veil hid his features entirely, and if he
was unmasked by some mishap-only the other High
Priests would know whether he was a fraud or not.
So, comparatively safe, Sojan moved along the corridor
towards the huge, metal-studded door which
was the portal to the Inner Chamber.
It was unlocked, and the guards on each side of it
stood away respectfully as Sojan opened it.
At first he could see nothing, the room was lit by
one torch which cast shadows everywhere. Then,
from one corner of the large chamber, a voice spoke.
It was a voice of infinite weariness, full of lost hope
and the knowledge of an eternity of despair.
"Why trouble us again, Priest, we have promised
to do your bidding? And we keep our word-if you
do not."
Sojan realised that instead of the evil forces he had
expected, here were prisoners; slaves rather than
allies of the Priesthood.
"I'm no priest," he said, "if I knew who you were
I might help you even!"
"Is this another trick, Priest," murmured the voice,
although this time there was a little hope in it.
"No trick. I'm a sworn enemy of the priesthood of
Rhan. I represent the rest of Zylor, who have no
wish to become enslaved by.the Rhanians. Yet rumour
has it that you are allied with them." He squinted
into the darkness. "Who are you-or what?"
"We are the old inhabitants of Zylor. We lived
here before ever the shining ships of humanity sprang
from distant planets in a desperate attempt to reach
another habitable planet. They thought that the end
of their world had come. As it happened their world
did not die, but it was too late then, they had taken
all their knowledge out into space with them, and in
the long journey from Galaxy to Galaxy much of
their knowledge perished, for the journey took centuries
to complete.
"By the time the new generations reached this
planet, their ancestors had died and Man had to
start again, almost from the beginning. These Men,
who called themselves "Lemurians" lived peacefully
with us for many hundreds of years and we helped
them as much as possible, for we are a very ancient
race and had more knowledge than ever the ancestors
of the Lemurians, although of a different kindfor
while Man concentrated on improving his body,
we concentrated on improving our minds and could
control mighty elements with our wills. Eventually
the Men became frightened of us and sent us away
(there were only a few of us living in far-flung colonies
then; now we are even less)."
"But how did you become the slaves of these
priests?" asked Sojan. "What happened?"
"Although there were many men who feared us
and called us Things of Evil and similar names, there
were others who began to worship us for our powers,
calling us gods and setting up altars and Temples
to us.
"Just as some men are foolish, some of our number
were foolish and began to think that perhaps
they were gods after all. They dwelt in the Temples
and had sacrifices made to them and took part in
meaningless rituals. The priests soon found their
weaknesses, however, and decided that they could
rule the people if they frightened them by telling
them of the wrath of the gods and so on. They
succeeded in capturing us and imprisoning us. I was
one of the foolish ones, our contemporaries have
long since left this planet in search of another, uninhabited
by Man, with whom they cannot live in
peace.
"You may have read in your history scrolls of the
mighty Theocracy which dominated the world at
one time. Rhan is now all that is left of the Theocracy-a
remnant of a great and terrible nation! The
people rose against their oppressors, country by country,
until the evil Priesthood was driven back, further
and further, to seek refuge on this island, the original
capital of the old Imperial Theocracy. It was here
that the cult, based on worship of us, was spawned
and, if you can help us, it is here that it will die.
Otherwise a new Black Age shall cover the world in
a cloak of death!"
"But," cried Sojan, "if you do not wish them to
rule Man then why do you help them? Why do you
lend them your powers to destroy the great Nations
of Zylor?"
"They have promised us freedom, O, Man! Freedom
after thousands of decades. Freedom after eons
of despair. We would follow our brothers, we would
travel the infinite lengths of Space and Time were
we once released. We would see Suns and Planets,
green things. Seas and Plains. For us these things
are worth more than life. We are of them more than
Man-for we, like the planets and the stars, and the
grass that grows for ever, are almost immortal. We
have no bodies, as Man knows bodies, no senses as
Man interprets senses-we are Minds. You can see
that the temptation is great! We were not strongwilled
to begin with, we were proud of Man's petty
ceremonies. Now that he offers us Light and Freedom
again, we must accept. Unless there is another
way."
"There may be another way," Sojan said. "If you
will but tell me how you are imprisoned, perhaps I
can release you!"
"There are certain minerals, rare and almost unknown,
which have the properties that lead has compared
to radium. Radium cannot harm or pass
through lead. Similarly, although we can pass through
most minerals and life forms, we are imprisoned if
we enter a certain precious stone. We can enter it,
but by some strange trick of nature, our beings cannot
pass back through it. Thus we were enticed,
centuries ago, into these blocks of ermtri stone. The
only way in which we can escape is by someone
outside boring shafts into the blocks and thus cutting
channels through which we can pass. Do you
understand?"
Dimly Sojan understood, though his brain was
shaken by the effort of trying to imagine beings so
utterly alien to Man, yet in some ways akin to him.
He picked up the torch and cast its light towards the
centre of the hall. There on an altar, covered by a
crimson cloth, rested five large blocks of some dark,
cloudy blue substance. Like-like blue jade. It was a
stone that Sojan, who had travelled the whole of his
planet almost, had never seen-had never, what is
more, heard of-not even in legends.
"I understand," he said, "what tool will cut it?"
"Steel, sharp steel will bore into it. Have you
steel?"
"Yes. Will it hurt you?"
"No, it will leave no impression."
Wiping sweat from his forehead and hands, Sojan
moved towards the blocks. He drew his sword and
clambered up on to the altar. Placing the sharp point
of his blade on top of the first block, he turned it
round and round. Feeling it bite deeper and deeper
into the strange substance he became aware of a
strange tingling which seemed to flow up his sword
and into his body, he couldn't define it but it was
not unpleasant. Suddenly there was a dazzling burst
of green and orange brightness and something seemed
to flow from the hole that he had bored, flow out
and upwards, lighting the room. He heard no words,
but in his mind there was a great sense of joy-of
thanks. Then, one by one he saw the other blocks,
broken by the same strange power, open and the
green and orange brightness flow from them.
Then they took on a slightly more solid shape,
until Sojan could make out eyes and circular bodies.
These, then, were the Old Ones. Perhaps in a million,
million years, man too would have succeeded
in being able to form the atoms of his body into
whatever shape he desired. Perhaps, these beings
once were Men? That would explain the strange
kinship Sojan felt for them. A kinship which his
Lemurian ancestors felt also, before their witnessing
of such alien powers changed their finer feelings
into those of fear and hate.
"Before you leave," Sojan begged, "I crave one
request as a price for your release."
"Anything!"
"Then when I am out of this building and safely at
sea, destroy this place of evil so that the power of
the priests will be shattered for all time and such an
evil can never rise again!"
"Gladly we grant you this. We will wait here until
you are at sea. But tread carefully, we cannot help
you to escape."
Thanking them, Sojan turned about and left, sword
in hand. But in his exultation he had forgotten the
soldiers outside and they stared in amazement at the
sword in his hand and the sweat on his face. This
did not seem to them any High Priest.
Taking quick stock of the situation, Sojan spoke to
them.
"I-I had a little difficulty with one of the bolts on
the interior," he lied, "I had to use this sword to
loosen it . . ."
With a puzzled look, the men bowed and saluted,
but there was doubt in their eyes.
"A priest would not go unveiled for anything," he
heard one of them murmur as he entered the room
which he had left previously. "He doesn't seem a
priest to me! Here you, stop a minute!"
But Sojan had bolted the door and was hastily
donning his weapons again. The men began to bang
on the door and more men came to see what the
noise was about.
"That's no priest," he heard someone say, "The
High Priest Thoro is conducting the Ceremony of
Death in the Outer Temple! He won't be back for
hours!"
"Batter the door down you fools," came a voice
that was obviously that of one in authority, probably
a High Priest.
Anxiously, Sojan looked for another exit. There
was only a curtained window.
He parted the curtain, and looked outside. It was
still dark. He looked down. A courtyard scarcely ten
feet below. With luck, he thought, I can jump down
there and escape as best I can. He put a foot on the
ledge and swung himself over, dropping lightly to
the grass of the courtyard. In the centre of the courtyard
a fountain splashed quietly-a scene of peace
and solitude. But not for long. He saw a face at the
window he had so recently quit.
"He's down there," one of the soldiers shouted.
Sojan ducked into the nearest doorway, opposite
the room he had left. He ran down a short, dark
corridor and up a flight of steps. No sign of pursuit
yet. Panting heavily he ran in the direction he knew
an exit to be. It would be guarded now, he knew, for
the whole Temple was by this time alert. And so it
was. With his usual good luck, Sojan had succeeded
in making the exit unchallenged. But there would be
no such luck here, with five huge soldiers coming at
him.
Again he had no time for heroics. His pistol came
up and two of his would-be killers went down. The
other three were on him now and his sword cut a
gleaming arc about his head. His battle-axe shrieked
as if for blood as he carried the attack towards his
foes instead of they to him. Nonplussed for a second,
they fell back.
That falling back was for them death, for now
Sojan had some kind of advantage and he made full
use of it as he drove blow after blow, thrust after
thrust into the men.
Bleeding himself from several wounds, Sojan came
on, down went one man, then another. Now the last
warrior, fighting with desperation hacked and parried,
and sought an opening in Sojan's amazing
guard.
None came, the man sought an opening too often,
lunged forward-and almost pinioned himself on
Sojan's blade. Back he tried to leap, clumsily. A
perfect target for a whistling, battered axe to bury
itself in helmet and brain.
Leaving his axe where it had come to rest, Sojan
fled the Temple. His heart pounding, he finally
reached the house where his friends waited.
"Come," he cried, "I'm successful-but we must
make the ship immediately, all of us, else we all die.
I don't know what they intend to do."
His companions realised that there was no time
for an explanation and followed him wordlessly.
A frantic race for the docks. One brief skirmish
with a City Patrol and then they were on board. Up
anchor, out oars, castoff.
And as the ship sped from the harbour they looked
back.
There came a blinding flash and then a deep,
rolling roar as the great Temple erupted in a sudden
burst of flame. Then, as they peered back at the city,
there was blackness again. The Temple was not
burning-there was no Temple now to burn-it had
been dissolved.
As they watched, Sojan and his friends saw five
streaks of blue and orange flame rise skyward and
rocket upwards and outwards-towards the stars.
"What was that?" gasped Nornos Rique.
"The Old Ones," smiled Sojan. "I'll tell you a tale
which you may not believe. But it is a tale which has
taught me much-as well as giving me a valuable
history lesson!"
The voyage back was not a boring one for Sojan's
companions as they listened to his strange tale.
But what of the Purple Galley you ask, what of
Orfil and the Princess who betrayed Rique? That,
readers, is a story which is short and sad. They, too,
attempted to sail through the Sea of Demons in
pursuit of Sojan and his companions.
But they were not so lucky.
10. The Plain of Mystery
THE WIND tore at the rigging of the tiny air-cruiser as
it pushed bravely into the howling storm.
Four men clung to the deck rails whilst a fifth
strove to steer the tossing gondola.
"Keep her headed North!" yelled Nornos Rique to
Sojan.
"At this rate we'll be tossed on to Shortani unless
the wind shifts!" he yelled back.
Parijh the Uffjirian grimaced.
"I've been meaning to go home for some time!" he
called.
"You'll be home for your own funeral unless someone
gives me a hand with this wheel!" cried Sojan.
Sojan, Nornos Rique, Parijh, Andel and Red, the
five men who had saved their planet of Zylor from
the evil priest-rulers of Rhan some months ago, were
returning to Hatnor after being the guests of honour
at several banquets held to celebrate their triumph.
Sojan, Rique, Andel and Red had been uncomfortable
about the whole thing, only Parijh, always glad
of the limelight, had enjoyed himself thoroughly.
The storm had sprung up quickly and they were
now battling to keep the little dirigible into the wind
which drove them steadily southwards.
"Wouldn't it be better to land, Sojan?" Andel
shouted.
"It would be, my friend, if we knew where we
were. There's every likelihood of getting out of this
trouble into something worse."
Suddenly there was a loud snapping sound and
the wheel spun throwing Sojan off balance and on to
the deck.
"What was that?" yelled Parijh.
"Steering's gone! We can't attempt to repair it in
this weather. We'll just have to drift now!"
The five trooped down into the tiny cabin. Even
there it was not warm and they were all depressed
as they shivered in their cloaks and attempted to get
some sleep.
Morning came and the storm had not abated. It
lasted all through that day, the wind ripping into the
ship and sending it further and further South.
"There's never been a storm like this in my memory!"
Nornos Rique said.
The others agreed.
"Further North," said Andel, "they're quite frequent.
Lasting for days, so they say."
"That's true," said Sojan.
By midnight of the next night the storm finished
and the sky cleared of the clinging cloud. The stars,
their constellations unfamiliar to Earth eyes, shone
brightly and Sojan took a quick bearing.
"We're over Shortani all right," he muttered. "Well
over. In fact, I believe we're near the interior of the
continent."
Beneath them the scene was one of peace rather
than that of death and mystery. Great plains, watered
by winding rivers, lush forests, rearing mountains,
proud-like gods looking down upon men.
Here and there herds of strange animals could be
detected for the moons were very bright. They were
drinking and did not look up at the airship gliding
silently above them.
In the morning Sojan and Andel set to work on
repairing the broken steering-lines whilst the others
looked down at the peaceful-seeming country beneath
them.
All the time they worked they drifted further and
further into the interior.
"If we drift much further Sojan, we won't have
enough fuel to get us out again. Remember, we only
had enough for a short journey!" Parijh called up to
him where he was working on the steering gear.
"Yit take us! I hadn't thought of that," cried Sojan.
"But there's nothing we can do until this steering is
fixed. Work as fast as possible Andel or we'll be
stranded here!"
But repairing the steering wires and readjusting
the rudder, especially sitting in the rigging with only
a flimsy safety line between you and oblivion, isn't
easy and it took Sojan and Andel several hours before
the motors could be started up again.
"There's not enough fuel to make it back to
Hatnor," Sojan said. "But if we're lucky we'll make
a civilised country on the Shortani coast!"
Now there was nothing they could do but hope
and the men relaxed, watching the wonderful scenery
beneath them and speculating on what kind of
men, if any, lived there.
Red, who played a Zylorian instrument called a
rinfrit-a kind of eight-stringed guitar, sang them a
song, based on an old legend about these parts. The
first verse went something like this:
"There's many a tale that has been told
Of Phek the traveller, strong and bold!
But the strangest one I've ever heardIs
when he caught a shifla bird."
"What's a shifla bird?" enquired Andel curiously.
"Oh, it's supposed to be as big as an airship and
looks like a great lizard."
His companions were amused at this story, and all
but Sojan, who was looking over towards the West,
laughed.
"Don't worry too much," said Sojan calmly, "but
is that anything like your shifla bird?"
And there, rising slowly from the forest, was the
largest animal any of the adventurers had ever seen.
Earth men would call it a dragon if they saw it. Its
great reptilian jaws were agape and its huge batwings
drove it along at incredible speed.
"It seems there was some truth in the legend,"
muttered Red, licking dry lips and automatically fingering
his pistol at his belt.
"There's always some truth in legends," said Sojan,
"however incredible."
The thing was almost upon them now, obviously
taking their cruiser for some kind of rival. It was as
big as their cruiser although its body was about half
the size whilst its wings made up the rest of its
bulk. It was a kind of blueish grey, its great mouth
a gash of crimson in its head whilst wicked eyes
gleamed from their sockets making it look like some
supernatural demon from the Zylorian "Halls of the
Dead"
"Drop, Sojan, drop!" cried Nornos Rique as the
men stood for a moment paralysed at this sight of
something which they attributed only to the story
scrolls of children.
Sojan whirled, rushed over to the controls and
pushed several levers which opened valves in their
gas-bag and caused the ship to lose height quickly.
The shifla swooped low overhead, barely missing
them and causing them to duck automatically. Suddenly
there came a crashing of branches, the ripping
of fabric and the harsh snap of breaking wood. The
ship had crashed into the forest. The men had been
so busy trying to escape from the danger above
them that they had forgotten the forest beneath them.
Sojan lifted his arm to shield his face and flung
himself backwards as a branch speared through the
ship as if it were a fish and nearly speared him at the
same time. Eventually the noise stopped and, although
the ship was swaying dangerously and threatening
to fall apart any moment, sending the men to
destruction, Sojan and his friends found that they
had only bruises and scratches.
Sojan's barbarian instincts came to the rescue. Catfooted
as ever he clambered out of the wreckage on
to the branch which had almost killed him.
"Quick," he yelled, "after me!"
His friends followed him quickly, Parijh panting
with the effort. They moved cautiously along the
branch and finally reached the trunk of the tree.
Down they clambered, easily now for the tree was
full of strong branches and it was only a drop of four
or five feet to the ground.
Sojan looked up to where the airship dangled, its
great gasbag deflated, the gondola smashed and torn.
"When that falls," he said, "we'd better be some
distance away for it's likely that the engine will
explode."
"There go our supplies and rifles and ammunition,"
said Nornos Rique quietly.
"We've got our lives-for the present at least,"
Sojan reminded him. "We'll have to head steadily
Northwards and hope that we don't strike a mountain
range. If we are lucky we can follow a river
across a plain. Several plains adjoin civilised or semicivilised
territories don't they, Parijh?"
"One of them runs into my own country of Uffjir,
Sojan, but there's one chance in fifty of making it!"
"Then it looks as if we'll have to chance it, Parijh,"
Sojan replied slowly, looking over towards the East.
"But at least we shall be able to ride. There-see?"
They looked in the direction in which he was
pointing. About a mile away, a herd of myats grazed
placidly.
"Fan out-we should catch them easily if we
organise properly," Sojan called.
Slowly, so that they would not disturb the animals,
Sojan and his friends closed in on the myats.
Once trapped they were easily caught for, unlike
most animals used as beasts of burden, myats were
bred originally for the sole purpose of carrying man.
Now that they were mounted, the friends made
good time in the direction in which they were headed.
Some days later Sojan caught sight of a strange gleam
in the distance-as if the sun was glancing off a highly
polished surface.
"Head in that direction," he called to his companions.
"There seems to be a building of some kind
over there!"
And sure enough, it was a building. A great glistening
domed construction, rising hundreds of feet,
so it seemed, into the air. It was built of a similar
stone to marble-but what was it? And why was it
standing alone in such a savage wilderness and (this
troubled the companions more than anything) were
there men using it now?
"The only way to find out who or what is in there
is to go nearer," said Andel.
"You're right," agreed Sojan. "Let's go!"
They forced their steeds into a quick trot.
They dismounted silently and made their way cautiously
to the wide entrance of the place, which
seemed to be unguarded.
There were windows high above them, seeming to
be set in rooms situated at different levels in the
building. Part of the roof was flat but most of it rose
in a magnificent dome. Although there were no signs
of corrosion at all, the men got the impression that
the building was centuries old.
"There seem to be no stairs in the place," mused
Sojan, looking around him at the gleaming marble
halls which they had entered. To his left were two
sheets of shining metal, seemingly set into the walls
for no reason. To his right was an archway leading
into a room just as bare as the one in which they
now stood.
"Wonder what these are?" Red said, brushing his
hand across one of the metal sheets.
Instantly there was a faint hum and the sheet of
metal disappeared upwards, revealing a small-was
it a cupboard?
Red stepped warily into the alcove, sword in hand.
At once, the sheet of metal hummed downwards
behind him.
"By Yit. He's trapped!" cried Sojan.
He brushed his own hand across the metal, but
nothing happened. For several minutes he tried to
open the metal door but it seemed impossible. How
Red had done it, they could not tell.
Suddenly from the outside came a yell.
Rushing into the sunlight they looked up-and
there was Red, looking very cheerful, grinning down
on them-from a window of the tenth storey, the one
nearest the roof.
"How did you get up there?" called Nornos Rique.
"The 'cupboard' took me up! It's a kind of moving
box which lifts you up to any storey you wish.
Though I had to go all the way up. There were lots
of buttons to press, but I dare not press any of them.
After I'd got out, the doors closed again. I tried to
get back in but the doors at that end wouldn't move.
It looks as if I'm stuck here for life."
He didn't look as if he was particularly worried
about the prospect.
Comprehending, Sojan rushed back into the great
hall and again passed his hand over the metal "door."
It hummed upwards. He didn't step in immediately
but waited for his friends to join him.
"The ones who built this place must have been
wonderful engineers," remarked Sojan. "And by the
way, I recognised the language in which the directions
for the operation of that thing were written-it's
old Kifinian!"
"What?" exclaimed Parijh. "You mean that the
ancestors of the Kifinians built this?"
"Obviously. Otherwise how do you explain the
language?"
"From what you learned at the Temple of Rhan,
Sojan," mused Nornos Rique, "the ancestors of the
entire planet, so far as human beings like ourselves
are concerned, came from another planet thousands
of years ago-perhaps this was built before the race
spread and degenerated. But what could it be?"
"I think I know," answered Sojan. "Notice how
the whole area around the building is entirely
treeless-a flat plain-a few shrubs, now, and other
vegetation, but for the most part flat. This place was
a landing field for airships of some kind. We have,
as you know, similar landing fields all over the civilised
parts of Zylor. This place was a control station
probably."
Suddenly Red who had been standing by the window
called to his friends.
"Look, down there!" he yelled. "Savages, hundreds of
them!"
Below them swarmed a silent mass of strange nearhuman
creatures. They all carried spears and broadbladed
swords. They were covered in short, matted
hair and had long tails curling behind them.
"We seem to have violated taboo ground, judging
by their actions," said Parijh who knew the people
better than the rest, for his race occasionally traded
with them. "They won't enter themselves, but they
will wait until we come out-as come out we must,
for food."
"The best thing we can do," said Andel, "is to
look around this place and see if there is any other
way out."
"Good idea," agreed Sojan, "if you see any more
of those metal plates, try to open them."
They split up and each explored a certain section
of the floor. Soon they heard Andel call from the
centre of the building. Rushing to the room from
which he had called they were astounded to see a
large, opened panel. This one revealed a kind of
bridge spanning a drop which must have gone right
down to the foundations of the building. The bridge
led to a huge, streamlined shell of gleaming metal
fitted with triangular fins.
They stepped on to the bridge and moved single
file across it until they reached a door. Scowling
faintly, Sojan deciphered the ancient hieroglyphics
on it.
"Here we are," he said, pressing a button. "To
Open." And open it did.
"It's obviously an airship of some kind," said Andel,
who was the most mechanically minded of the five.
"Probably a ship similar to the ones in which our
ancestors came to this planet."
"You mean an airship capable of travellingthrough
space?" said Sojan.
"Perhaps," said Andel, "but also travelling from
continent to continent probably. If only we knew
how to operate it!"
They finally managed to find the control room of
the ship. All around them were tiers of dials and
instruments. Working quickly, now that the script
was becoming more familiar to him, Sojan deciphered
most of the captions on the instruments. Set on the
main control panel were levers marked, "Automatic,
Emergency, Poltoon, Automatic, Emergency, Jhar",
etc. The names were those of continents.
"We can't stay here all the time," said Sojan. "If
we stay we will starve to death, if we go outside we
die, we might as well risk it." So saying, and without
waiting for his friends' advice he pulled the
lever marked Poltoon and stood back.
There came a gentle hum as the door through
which they had entered closed. Another hum grew
steadily louder and the entire roof of the building
opened out letting in the sunlight. Then a hiss and a
rumble like thunder and Sojan and his companions
were thrown to the floor. Still the rumble increased
until blackness overcame them and they lost consciousness.
Sojan was the first to recover. Looking through
the forward porthole he saw a sight which to him
was terrifying. The velvet blackness of outer space,
stars set like diamonds in its ebony beauty.
There was another rumble from the depths of the
ship. With animal tenacity he sought to cling to
consciousness. But it was no good. He collapsed
once more on the floor of the ship.
He awoke a second time to see a blue sky above
him and green vegetation beneath him. His friends
rose on shaky legs.
"We're not much better off, it seems," grinned
Sojan-cheerful now. "We're in the Poltoonian Wilderness.
The nearest civilised land is Tigurn. See
over there are the remains of a port similar to the
one on the Shortani plain."
He pulled another lever. Immediately the portholes
disappeared and they had the sensation of
moving downwards at great velocity. A high pitched
whine and they stopped. A panel slid open and a
small bridge moved outwards over a drop of some
five feet above the ground.
"There was probably a landing stage at this point,"
said Sojan with the air of an ancient professor delivering
a lecture. "Anyway," he laughed, "we can
drop the last few feet."
When they reached the ground they stood back.
Then the faint purr of machinery and the doors
closed. Another sound, not quite so smooth-the
chug-chug of an airship motor. The companions
turned and saw several large airships of standard
pattern circling above them. They flew the banner of
Pelira, a country which had allegiance to Hatnor.
Flying low, the captain of the airship inspected them,
saw that they were not the strange monsters he had
expected and landed his craft lightly fifty feet away
from them. They ran towards it.
The look of astonishment on the captain's face
was ludicrous. He immediately recognised the companions
who, since their conquest of the priest-rulers
of Rhan had become national heroes.
"What-what- ?" was all he could get out at first.
"How're you fixed for fuel, friend?" laughed Sojan.
"We-we've got a full tank, sir, but how . . . ?"
"Then head for Hatnor," grinned the adventurer.
"We'll explain on the way."
11. The Sons of the Snake-God
"WHO SEEKS to set foot in Dhar-Im-Jak?"
A harsh voice rang across the harbour to the merchantman
Kintonian Trader, which ran at anchor there.
The captain cupped his hands into a megaphone
and roared back at the soldier.
"Sojan Shieldbearer, late of the court of Nornos
Kad in Hatnor, mercenary swordsman! Seeking
employment!"
"I've heard of him. Very well, we need good sword
arms in Dhar-Im-Jak, tell him he may land!"
Traani, captain of the Trader, called down to Sojan
who sat sprawled in his cabin.
"They say you can land, Sojan!"
"Right, I'll get my gear together."
Ten minutes later, a tall figure stepped on to the
deck of the ship. His long fair hair was held back
from his eyes by a fillet of metal, his dark blue eyes
had a strange, humorous glint in them. Over a jerkin
of green silk was flung a heavy cloak of yellow,
his blue breeches were tucked into leather boots.
Upon his back was slung a long and powerful air
rifle, on his left arm he carried a round shield. From
a belt around his waist were hung a long vilthor and
a pistol holster. Sojan the Swordsman was looking
for work.
Later that day, in an inn near the city centre,
Sojan met the man to whom he had been directed
when he had told the authorities of the harbour
what kind of employment he was seeking.
"You're looking for employment in the ranks of
the regular military, I hear? What qualifications do
you have?" he said.
"I was commander of the Armies of Imperial Hatnor
for nearly a year. In that time I succeeded in stopping
a rising in Veronlam, a similar rising in Asno, I
organised the Poltoonian barbarians when Nornos
Kad was deposed and restored him to his throne. I
and four others were instrumental in utterly destroying
the would-be conquerors of Zylor-the Rhanian
Theocracy. I have been involved in several minor
border wars, but of late things have quietened down
and I thought that I would try my luck somewhere
else. I heard of the impending war between the city
states of Dhar-Im-Jak and Forsh-Mai and decided
that I would like to take part."
"I have heard of you, Sojan. Your remark about
Rhan jogged my memory. I feel that you would be a
great asset to us. We need more professional soldiers
of your calibre. As you know, both Dhar-ImJak
and Forsh-Mai have been on friendly terms for
hundreds of years, neither of us had any use for
regular armies. Then about a year ago this new religious
cult took over the ruling of Forsh-Mai and
quickly formed an army of soldiers, spies, troublemakers
and all kinds of undercover men. It was only
recently that our own spies brought us the news
that, as we suspected, Forsh-Mai was preparing to
march into Dhar-Im-Jak and take over our republic."
"Have you any idea when they intend to attack?"
"In two weeks time, no less, I'm sure."
"Then we must work fast. I would be grateful to
know what kind of command you intend giving
me?"
"I shall have to discuss that with my superiors. I
will naturally let you know as soon as possible."
Edek rose, downed the last of his drink and, with
a short nod, left the inn. Just as Sojan was rising,
there came a scream from the alley outside. Sword
out, he rushed for the door to see a girl struggling in
the grip of several burly fighting men. They were
obviously bent on kidnapping her and Sojan lost no
time in engaging the nearest hirelng. The man was
an expert swordsman, his thrusts were well timed
and it was all Sojan could do, at first, to parry them.
The man's companions were still holding the girl
who seemed to be making no attempt to get free.
The clash of steel was music to him and a grim
fighting smile appeared on his lips. Suddenly he felt
a hard blow on the back of his head and the lights
went out.
He regained consciousness in a small room, barred
on both door and windows. Standing over him were
two men; one held a water jug in his hand with
which he was dousing Sojan.
"So our hard-headed mercenary is at last awake; I
see!" The tone was gloating. The man's face did not
belie the impression his voice gave. His thick black
locks and beard were curled and oiled.
Upon his fingers were heavy rings, his nails were
tinted with gold. Sojan looked at him in disgust. The
bejewelled fop signalled to his companion to throw
some more water at Sojan. Instantly Sojan rose and
knocked the jug flying across the small cell.
"If your manners were as fine as the silks you
wear, my friend, I should take you for some sort of
man!"
The fop's face twisted for a moment and he half
raised his hand. Then he smiled and dropped the
hand to his side.
"We'll allow the wolf some time in which to cool
the heat of his temper as water seems to be no use,"
he murmured. "Come Yuckof, let us leave this
place-it smells!"
Sojan signalled to the guard who was locking the
door.
"What place is this, friend?"
"You're in the Castle of Yerjhi, swordsman, we
caught you nicely didn't we? That ruse in getting a
girl to pretend that she was being captured was Lord
Yerjhi's idea. He's a clever one. You'd be better off
to be a little more civil to him, he is thinking of
employing you."
Several hours later, Yerjhi returned with the same
escort.
"Now, Sojan," he smiled, "I can understand your
annoyance at being locked up in this place-but it
was the only way in which we could-um-convince
you of our sincerity when we offer you fifty thousand
derkas to take command of our armies and lead
them to glorious victory for the State of Forsh-Mai.
We, the Sons of the Snake, will conquer all. Everything
will be yours. What say you man, is that not a
fair proposition?"
"Aye, it's fair," Sojan's eyes narrowed. He decided
to bluff for a while. "Fifty thousand you say?"
"That and any spoils you can take for yourself
when we loot Dhar-Im-Jak!"
"But what's this 'Sons of the Snake' you mention?
Do I have to join some secret society to wield a
sword for fifty thousand derkas?"
"That is a necessary part of our offer, Sojan. We
are, after all, doing this for the glory of Rij, the
Snake, Lord of the World and the After World, Master
of Darkness, Ruler of the ..."
"Yes, yes, we'll forget that for a moment. What
does it involve?"
"First a meeting of all the major disciples, myself,
the General-in-Command (who will take orders from
you while the conquest is in progress), my majordomo,
the two priests who invent-hmm-who
spread the Truth of the Snake."
"But why this mumbo-jumbo-if you want to conquer
your enemy, why not just do it? I can't understand
what you're trying to do."
"Then briefly I will explain. The two cities have
been at peace for hundreds of years. Men and women
from the states have intermingled with each other,
intermarried. Apart from the names and boundaries,
we are practically the same people. We need an
excuse, man, don't you see? We can't send a man to
march against his brother or even son unless he
thinks that there is something worth fighting for.
This, my dear Sojan, is a-hmm-Holy war. Quite
legitimate. We are-how shall I put it?-spreading
the Word of the Snake God with the Sword of Justice!
Part of our indoctrination campaign, actually,
that last bit."
"Right! I'll join." Sojan had hit on a daring plan.
"When do I become an initiate?"
An hour later, Sojan stood in a darkened room. In
front of him was a long table and at it sat men dad
in robes decorated with serpents.
"Let the ceremony begin," he intoned.
Now was the time to act. They had given Sojan
back his sword along with his other equipment and
he now drew it. With the blade humming he downed
the two nearest men. Three left, three wary men and
led by one who had been described as the finest
swordsman in Shortani.
Luckily only two of the men were swordsmenthe
other was almost helpless. In the fore Yerjhi,
cowl flung back and his face a mask of hate.
"Trick me would you," he hissed. "We'll show
you what we do to dogs who try to turn on Yerjhi!"
Sojan felt a lancing pain go through him and he
felt the warm blood as it trickled down his left arm.
With renewed energy he launched himself at Yerjhi
who was taken off guard for a moment. Clean steel
pierced a tainted heart and the man toppled backwards
with a short death-scream.
With the fake "Sons of the Snake God" exposed
for what they were, what amounted to civil war was
averted and the two cities resumed their friendly
relations. Once again Sojan had done a major service
for a cause in which he believed.
12. The Devil Hunters of Norj
THE LAST rays of Zylor's second sun were just waning
when Sojan reined his myat and stared down
into the green valley below.
He glanced at the crude map before him.
"This must be the Valley of Norj. It seems to be
unexplored according to the map. Strange that no
one has ventured into it."
Strange it was; for, even in the dusk, Sojan could
see that the valley was lush and green. A river
wound through it and brightly plumed birds sang
from the branches of tall trees. A seeming paradise.
"It will make an excellent place to camp," thought
the mercenary as he guided his mount downwards.
Later that night, he made his camp in a small
natural clearing in the forest. His myat was tethered
nearby and his campfire glowed cheerily. The night
was warm and full of forest smells.
After eating his meal, Sojan climbed between his
blankets and was soon asleep.
It was just after midnight when the strange noises
awakened the warrior.
There they were again-a peculiar hissing screech
and the pounding of hooves; the cries of-men, and
the vicious cracks of whips.
Sojan raised himself on one elbow, hand reaching
for his sword. The myat stirred uneasily and swished
its great tail from side to side.
The noises drew nearer and then subsided as they
fell away towards the West of the valley.
Sojan did not sleep any more that night but kept a
watchful eye open. The rest of the night was uneventful
and in the morning, Sojan cooked himself a
big meal which was meant to last him the day, for
he intended to investigate the noises he had heard
the night before.
Riding slowly, with eyes always scanning the
ground, Sojan soon found the tracks that the inhabitants
of the valley had made. There were two distinct
sets of tracks. One similar to those of a myat
although with subtle differences, seemingly lighter.
The others were entirely unfamiliar. Three-toed tracks
like, and yet unlike, those of a bird-and considerably
larger. The beast that had made them as obviously
a quadruped of some kind, but other than that
Sojan could not tell what kind of animal had made
them-there were fourlegged birds he could think
of-and none of these he had heard about were as
large as this.
There had been at least ten riders, and it seemed
that they had been chasing one or perhaps two of
these bird-beasts. Probably some kind of hunt,
thought Sojan, yet what kind of men were they who
hunted at the dead of night?
Sojan rode on, following the tracks in the hope
that he would find some clue to the mystery. He
came across a steep inclination, the tracks ended
here in a flurry of mud and-blood. Then the tracks
of the beasts the men had been riding continued,
and they had ridden for a short while parallel with
the bluff and then forced their animals to ride up it.
Sojan did the same, the beast slipped occasionally
and nearly slid back but eventually it reached the
top. From there Sojan saw a strange" scene.
A battle of some kind was going on between two
groups of men. Near a squat black-stoned tower,
five men, one mounted, were endeavouring to check
a horde of armoured warriors who rushed from the
tower. Beasts similar to Sojan's myat but hornless
and almost tailless stood waiting.
The mounted man held the tethering reins of the
other four animals while he cut at two of the armoured
men with a battleaxe held in his right hand.
Although the mounted man was clad in armour,
the other four were dressed only in jerkins of coloured
cloth and divided kilts of leather. They were unshod
and carried no sheaths for the weapons, mainly
swords, with which they defended themselves. It
seemed to Sojan that they were attempting to escape
from the armoured warriors, one of whom, dressed
more richly, and darker than the other, stood in the
rear and urged them on in a language which was
unfamiliar, yet strangely familiar, to Sojan's ears.
But there was no time to ponder over this now;
the men needed help and Sojan, in a more curious
than chivalrous mood, intended to aid them and
perhaps find some answer to the mystery.
His long spear was out, his shield up and he
forced the myat into a wild gallop down the hill,
screaming to his gods in a barbarian war-shout.
His savage thrust caught the first of the armoured
warriors in the throat and stayed there, the spear
jerking like a tufted reed in a storm. His sword
screamed from its scabbard as he pushed deeper
into the melee of cursing men.
Taking this chance of escape while the enemy
were still confused, the other men quickly mounted
their beasts. Sojan was still in the thick of it, sword
lashing everywhere and dealing death with every
stroke. One of the riders looked back, saw the mercenary
still engaged and spurred his own beast back
to where Sojan fought.
Grinning his thanks to Sojan he covered the mercenary's
retreat with his own slim blade then followed.
Howling, the warriors attempted to pursue on foot,
were brought back by their leader's frantic cries and
scrambled round the back of the building.
The armoured rider called to Sojan in the familiar,
yet unintelligible tongue, and pointed towards the
East. Sojan understood and turned his myat in that
direction. Behind them their pursuers were whipping
their steeds in an effort to overtake them.
Deep into the forest they rode, leaving their enemies
far.behind. For perhaps three hours they detoured
until they reached the end of the valley where
a sheer cliff rose. Brushing aside some shrubbery,
the armoured man disclosed an opening in the base
of the cliff.
Ducking their heads, the six rode through, the last
man replacing the camouflage.
The passage ended in several connecting caves
and it was in one of these that they stabled their
mounts and continued on foot to the cave at the far
end. Here they slumped into chairs, grinning with
relief at their escape.
The leader, the man in armour began to speak to
Sojan who stood bewilderedly trying to understand
the language in which they questioned him. Vaguely
he began to realise what it was-it was his own
tongue, yet so altered as to be scarcely recognisable.
In an hour he could understand most of their speech
and in two he was telling them how he had come to
the Valley of Norj.
"But I am curious to find out who you are-and
why men hunt giant four-legged birds at midnight,"
he said. "Who were the men from whom you
escaped?"
"It is a long story to explain in a few words," said
Jarg, the leader, "but I will first attempt to tell you a
little of the political situation here, in Norj.
"There are two distinct races living here-men like
ourselves-and-another race whom I scarcely like
to define as 'men'. Ages ago our people reached this
valley after a long sea voyage and trek across Shortani.
we came to this valley and settled in it and it was
not for some time that we learned that another people
lived at the far end of the valley. A race of grim,
blackhaired and black-eyed men, who hunted at night
with steeltipped flails and who remained in their
castles during the day. They did not trouble us at
first and eventually we became used to the hunts,
even though they sometimes passed through our
fields and destroyed our crops. We were secure, we
thought, in the valley and there was no man curious
enough to venture too near the black-stoned castles
of the Cergii.
"But soon men and women-even children-of
our people began to disappear and the hunts became
more frequent for the Cergii had found a new
sport-a different quarry to the Devil-birds which
they breed and release at night to hunt with their
whips. It was then that the mangled bodies of our
tribesmen began to be found-lashed to death.
"They were capturing our people-and hunting
them! So it was that we declared war upon these
beasts, these whom we had never harmed nor attempted
to harm.
"Over the years traitors to our race went over to
the enemy and became their warriors-you saw some
of them today-our once great race dwindled-and
became fugitives, living in caves and-if capturedthe
quarry of the Hunters of Norj. Still we carry on
warfare with them-but it is hit and run fighting at
best. The four you see here were captured recently
and it was more by luck than anything that I managed
to bribe a guard to release them. I came last
night with weapons and myats-you see that the
breed had changed as has our speech. Unfortunately
the timing was imperfect and the first sun arose
before we could make good our escape. We were
seen and would all be dead or captured had it not
been for you."
"There must be some way to defeat them!" cried
Sojan. "And if there is a way-I swear that I will
find it!"
Sojan and the fighting men of Norj, some sixty in
all, stood in the main cave, waiting for nightfall.
Plans of Sojan's attempt to overcome the Cergii,
who hunted men with steel-tipped flails, had been
discussed and Sojan and Jarg, the leader, had reached
a decision.
The Cergii were few, it seemed, about ten in number.
They were immortal, or at least their life-spans
were incredibly long and the race had gradually dwindled
to ten evil sorcerer-warriors whose only pleasure
was the midnight hunts.
At dusk, Sojan rose, went over the final plan with
his friends, and left, heading Eastwards towards the
castles of the Cergii-some twenty in all, mostly in
an advanced state of decay-only one which housed
the Cergii and their Norjian slaves and hirelings.
The tiny Zylorian moons gave scant light and Sojan
found it difficult picking his way through the rubble
of the ruined outbuildings.
There came a faint scuffling behind him; a sound
which only a barbarian's senses could have heard.
Sojan ignored it and carried on.
Even when the scuffling came nearer he ignored
it. The sudden blow on the back of his head was
impossible to ignore, however, and a blind sense of
survival set him wheeling round, hand groping for
his sword hilt before blackness, deeper than night
swam in front of his eyes and he lost consciousness.
He awoke in a damp-smelling cell, only lit by
torchlight which filtered through a tiny grille in the
wall. The cell was obviously on a corner for the large
barred door was not in the same wall as the grille.
Peering through this door was an unkempt warrior
clad in dirty armour and holding a spear.
He glared short-sightedly at the mercenary with
half-mad eyes. His mouth gaped pen showing bad
teeth and he chuckled loudly.
"You're the next game for the Hunters of Cergii,"
he cackled. "Oh! What a feast the beasts will have
tonight."
Sojan ignored these words, turned over and attempted
to ease the pain in his aching head.
After many hours in which he attempted to get
some rest, Sojan was jabbed roughly awake by the
guard's spear butt.
"What is it now?" he enquired as he raised himself
to his feet and dusted off the straw in which
he'd been sleeping.
"Heh, heh!" cackled the man. "It's almost midnight-time
for one of our little hunts!"
Sojan became tense. He had a plan based on the
knowledge that if he was captured he would most
certainly be forced to partake in one of the hunts of
the Cergii-as the quarry.
"Very well," he said, trying to sound as frightened
as possible.
The courtyard was dark and gloomy, one moon
showing through a gap in the ruins. The strange
smell of an unknown animal came to Sojan's nostrils
and he gathered that these were the "hounds" of
the Cergii that Jarg had told him about.
He heard the stamping of the myats' hooves and
the jingle of harness and, as his eyes became accustomed
to the darkness, made out the vague outlines
of tall mounted men.
"Is the quarry ready?" called out a voice as dead
and cold as the ruins around them.
"Yes, Master, he is here!"
"Then tell him that he will be given quarter of an
hour's start-then we will be upon his scent!" the
voice went on.
The guards stood aside and Sojan was off-along
a route already planned nights ago. His plan was a
daring one and one which called for a great deal of
courage. He was acting as a human snare for the
Hunters.
Down a narrow forest trail he ran, the trees and
grasses rustling in the cold night breeze, the sound
of small animals calling to each other and the occasional
scream as a larger animal made its kill.
The air in his lungs seemed to force itself out as he
ran faster and faster. The time was getting short and
he had several more minutes yet until he could reach
the agreed spot.
Sounds-not the sounds of the forest, but more
ominous-began to reach his ears. The sounds of
cracking whips and thundering hooves as the Hunters
and their silent hounds rode in pursuit.
Faster and faster he ran keeping his eyes open for
the landmark which would afford him comparative
safety.
At last it came into sight, just as the cracking of
whips and pounding hooves seemed to be on top of
him. Past the tall rock he ran, into a tiny gorge
flanked on each side by towering rock walls.
Up the side of the cliff he scrambled as the Hunters
entered the gorge. Then:
"Now!" roared Sojan, and as he did so sixty deathtipped
arrows flew down and buried themselves in
the bodies of many of the Cergii.
Their curses and frantic screams were music to
Sojan and his friends as they fitted new arrows and
let fly at the sounds.
Sojan leapt down the rocks again, a long sword in
his right hand.
A shadowy rider loomed out of the darkness and
an evil face, white teeth flashing in a grin of triumph,
aimed a blow at Sojan with his own blade.
Sojan cut upwards, catching the rider in the leg.
He screamed and tumbled off his steed, putting it
between himself and Sojan.
He came upright, limping rapidly in the mercenary's
direction. Sojan ducked another savage cut
and parried it. Down lunged his opponent's sword
attempting to wound Sojan's sword-arm. He again
parried the stroke and counterthrust towards the
man's chest.
Following up this move with a thrust to the heart,
the mercenary ended the evil hunter's life.
Most of the Cergii were now either dead or mortally
wounded and it did not take Sojan and his
friends long to finish off the job they had started.
"Now for their hirelings!" yelled Sojan, goading
his myat in the direction from which they had come;
his sword dripping red in the moonlight, his hair
tousled and a wildness in his eyes.
The sixty riders thundered down the narrow forest
trail towards the castles of the dead Cergii, Sojan
at their head, voicing a battle-cry which had been
shouted at a dozen great victories for the men whom
Sojan had led.
Straight into the courtyard they swarmed, catching
the soldiers entirely unawares.
Dismounting, they crashed open the doors of the
castle and poured in.
"Guard the doors!" yelled Sojan. "And all other
exits-we'll exterminate every traitor in the place!"
His first call was in the dungeons-for there he
knew he would find the man who had been his jailer
during the previous day.
The half-crazed warrior cringed when he saw Sojan
enter sword in hand. But one look at the tall mercenary
told him that he could expect no mercy.
Drooling with fear he yanked his own sword from
its scabbard and swung a blow at Sojan which would
have cut him in two had it not been deflected by
Sojan's blade.
Coolly Sojan fought while his opponent became
more and more desperate.
Slowly the warrior was forced back as Sojan's relentless
sword drove him nearer and nearer the wall.
His madness gave him immense stamina and gradually
he began to fight with more skill.
"Heh, heh!" he cackled, "you will soon die man!
Think not that you escaped death when you escaped
the Cergii!"
Sojan smiled a grim smile and said nothing.
Suddenly the maddened warrior wrenched a spear
from the wall and hurled it at Sojan. It plunked
heavily into his left arm causing him to gasp with
pain.
Then his eyes hardened and the warrior read his
fate in them.
"You'll die for that," said Sojan calmly.
Almost immediately the warrior went down before
a blurring network of steel and died with an
inch of steel in his throat.
Sojan returned to the main hall of the castle where
his friends were finishing off the rest of the Cergii's
warriors.
"Well," he laughed cheerfully, "I must be off!"
Jarg turned. He saw the wound inflicted by the
madman's spear.
"You can't ride in that state, Sojan!" he cried.
"Oh it will heal," Sojan smiled. "It is only a superficial
cut! But you have work to do, restoring your
farms now that the Cergii are vanquished. I should
like to stay-but this is an interesting continent with
lots to see. If I hurry I might be able to see it all
before I die!"
With that he strode from the room, mounted his
myat and cantered off, up the steep track which led
out of the valley of Norj.
"There goes a brave man!" murmured Jarg as he
watched him disappear over the hill-top.
JERRY CORNELIUS
AND CO.
New WorldsJerry
Cornelius
NEW WORLDS began as a magazine founded by SF
enthusiasts in the middle 1940s. A consortium published
the first few issues. This consortium consisted
of, among others, Bill Temple, Ted Carnell, Leslie
Flood, John Wyndham, Frank Arnold and Steve Frances.
Later Maclarens took it over (though the company
remained independent as Nova Publications
Ltd.), and published it for the best part of its career
with Ted Carnell as editor. Ted published the first
Ballard stories and the work of then-starting authors
like Brunner, Aldiss, Roberts, etc. In 1964 the circulations
of the magazines (Science Fantasy was also
edited by Ted) were very low and Maclarens decided
to fold the titles. David Warburton of Roberts and
Vinter Ltd., heard they were folding and decided to
buy them. Ted wanted to edit his new anthology
series, New Writings in SF, and so recommended me
as editor. Warburton wanted two editors (wisely),
one for each of the magazines. I chose New Worlds
and Kyril Bonfiglioli became editor of Science Fantasy.
My first issue, in a paperback-style format, but a
magazine in all other respects, appeared for MayJune
1964 (number 142). We ran as a bi-monthly for a
short time and then went monthly with issue 146.
Many people expected me to opt for the editorship
of Science Fantasy, since most of my work had previously
appeared in that magazine, but in fact I was
interested in broadening the possibilities of the SF
idiom and New Worlds, being a much more open
title, seemed the best place to do it. My first editorial
stated pretty much the policy I have followed ever
since, though perhaps I'm a little more sophisticated
now. Also I was naive in thinking there were a lot of
authors who shared the sense of frustration which
Ballard and I had felt for some years. I tried to find
good young authors and follow what one might call
a policy of enlightened conservatism-publishing the
best of the old and the best of the new. There were a
lot of outcries when we started dealing with explicit
sex (never an important issue to us) and so on, also
when the first Ballard fragmented narratives began
to appear with The Atrocity Exhibition, also with the
rather astringent criticism of "Golden Age" masters
of SF, etc., but gradually readers began to realise
that there was value in the new stuff and it didn't
take long before they were criticising the newer stuff
in its own terms. We were crusading but we weren't
thinking in terms of tabu-breaking and so on, because
the restrictions here had never been as marked
as they were in the US. We were seriously attempting
to find new ways of dealing with new subject
matter and we always placed substance before style.
People have since confused our "revolution" with a
stylistic revolution, but our principal aim was concerned
with substance and structure-it had little to
do with what Judy Merril and Harlan Ellison, for
instance, later came to term the "new wave" in US
SF. We were specifically out to perpetuate, if you
like, the European moral tradition in literature. We
hardly "rejected" the US pulp tradition, because it
had never much influenced us anyway. Some of the
writers, indeed, were quite conservative in their tastes
and styles-Disch, for instance, who became closely
associated with the magazine (and still is). While
having no prejudice against it (and admiring much
of it) we had little in common with the aims apparently
represented in the work of the newer (or regenerated)
US writers like Ellison, Delany, Zelazny,.
Lafferty or Silverberg. We also, of course, published
most of those writers at some stage, and were pleased
to do' so, because we always strove for a broad
representation of the best work of its kind. I feel we
published some of the best work done by themZelazny's
For A Breath I Tarry (later reprinted, I think,
in Amazing) and several others: Ellison's Boy and His
Dog, Delany's Time Considered as a Helix, etc. But our
main raison d'etre became the publishing of what
some would call "experimental" work and when, in
1967, Roberts and Vinter suffered severe financial
set-backs (not over the SF magazines), Brian Aldiss
was responsible for suggesting to the Arts Council
(responsible for encouraging and maintaining the
arts; a government-financed agency) that they help
us. Thanks largely to the enthusiasm of Angus Wilson,
then chairman of the Council, and letters from
various distinguished critics and academics (rallied
by Brian) we received an award which, while not
enough to support us in any way-save as a "little
magazine"-gave us the moral support we needed
and I became part-publisher, putting my own money
into the magazine and going to the large, "glossy"
format we then adopted. Unfortunately the two business
partners I had to begin with showed themselves
over-cautious and pulled out so that the
magazine schedules were thrown into confusion. During
1967-8 we followed an erratic schedule culminating
in the banning of two issues by the two major
British distributors and the banning of the magazine
in South Africa, New Zealand, Australia, etc. All of
these areas were fairly crucial to us and if it hadn't
been for advertising we should have had to fold.
Also the newspapers came out in our favour and the
ban was technically lifted. It was at this time that a
Question was asked in the House of Commons about
public money being spent on a "pornographic" magazine
and it seemed for a while that we would lose
the grant. This blew over and I became sole publisher
of the magazine. Foolishly, I didn't form a
company to publish the magazine, so that I became
personally responsible for the debts. From 1968 to
19711 published New Worlds. In 1970 it emerged that
the distributors had been receiving large quantities
of New Worlds and had deliberately refrained from
distributing them without telling us because they
wanted to avoid any further newspaper publicity.
Effectively we lost the income on six months' issues
and I suddenly found myself owing over 3000,
which I didn't have. This was at a time when, thanks
particularly to Charles Platt who was editing the
magazine and running the business affairs, New Worlds
had become viable. I was forced to wind New Worlds
up, publishing a last "Subscription Only" issue (No.
201) in 1971, as an independent company. Tom Dardis
of Berkley expressed an interest in doing New Worlds
as a Quarterly and Anthony Cheetham was very
enthusiastic about doing it through Sphere in this
country, so I did four issues for Berkley who then
decided that sales didn't merit their continuing the
series. I decided, though the Sphere sales were on
the increase, to cut back to two issues a year for the
time being, since the Sphere advance alone wasn't
sufficient to cover what I wanted to do and we're
still partially financing the British editions through
subsidiary income derived, for instance, from my
editing fees for the Best of New Worlds series and so
on. And, of course, I'm still paying off the creditors
for the large size issues.
The daily routine? It varied, depending on who
was publishing the magazine or, for that matter,
who was editing it, since I didn't, of course, edit it
for the whole time. The early days were fairly quiet,
with just Lang Jones and myself doing the whole
thing from an office I had in Southwark. Later I
began to work from home, going into the publisher's
office about once a week, and later still Charles Platt
joined the staff as art editor and much improved the
appearance of the paperback size issues. That period,
too, was the only time I was actually getting
paid to do it! By and large I tend to set one or two
days aside for reading. Lang Jones is our best copyeditor
and he would tend to do that (and still does)
after I'd done the rough copy-editing. We never
change stories without consultation with the author
and the author's viewpoint is always respected. Where
we have changes to suggest we tend to Xerox the
manuscript, make the suggestions on the Xerox and
send them to the author for his or her comments. If
the author disagrees we'll discuss alternatives until
we're both satisfied. This extends even to titles. The
office always ran on democratic lines, with every
editor being encouraged to encourage authors who
suited his particular taste. This meant, of course,
that I'd sometimes publish stories I couldn't stand or
that I would include stories others didn't like, but
we reached a fairly satisfactory compromise ("I'll put
this story in I think is brilliant because you're putting
in that story you think is brilliant.") I don't believe
there's such a thing as objective literary judgement
for someone running a magazine and it seemed
the best way of ensuring the representation of as
many different kinds of writing as possible. The
special "New Writers" issues we have done have
largely been the work of people like Jim Sallis, Graham
Hall, Mike Harrison, Graham Charnock and
Charles Platt. Through most of the magazine's career
there was always something of a "commune"
feel about the day-to-day editing, with authors and
staff getting together to discuss specific stories or
general policy. The issues about which I am happiest,
I suppose, are the first few of the 1967-8 large
size issues where my own policies found their strongest
expression. To me, these were the best issuessay
from 173 to 176 where we got a good balance
between science and art features, artwork, good "conventional"
fiction and good "experimental" fiction.
Particular issues came after that which I particularly
liked but not as a "run." I enjoyed doing the special
201st issue (labelled our Special Good Taste Issue
and containing a distinctly Victorian feel!). The last
thing I can think of to say about the day-to-day
running of the magazine was that it filled the minds
of a fairly large group of us for a long time-i.e.
social life for many of us was centred around the
magazine. It dominated our days. A rather heady
and hectic love affair in which the magazine could
be seen from time to time as either an inspiring
mistress or a vampiric femme fatale. Certainly the
publishing problems dominated my days and nights
for several years.
I think we accomplished a fair amount. Without
doubt we altered the attitudes of many publishers
towards the newer ideas we were promoting. We
encouraged many authors to do their best and/or
most interesting work. Many authors, for instance,
claimed that without New Worlds they would have
given up writing or that they would have become
cynical about their writing or that they wouldn't
have put so much work into something. Aldiss,
Ballard, Disch, Sladek, Roberts and others have all
said, at different times, that New Worlds encouraged
them to do their best work. We were responsible for
interesting many critics, academics and journalists in
what might be called the SF renaissance. I think we
achieved an enormous amount. If what we were
trying to do has been misinterpreted in America this
has largely been because most people received their
impressions at second-hand through, say, the Judith
Merril Year's Best and England Swings anthologies.
Judy did a lot to publicise New Worlds and was a
good friend, but her interpretations were often somewhat
at odds with our views! New Worlds became a
banner in Judy's own crusade-and Judy, after all,
started the ball rolling in the US. If the issues became
clouded in rhetoric about "new wave speculative
fiction" or "The New Thing', it wasn't much to
do with us. Harlan Ellison followed Judy with Dangerous
Visions and I think it's fair to claim that again,
if obliquely, New Worlds supplied the impetus. I think,
however, that battles are being fought in the States
which have been over in this country for some yearseveryone's
settled down to doing their own thing.
There was never any danger of one idea superceding
another but it was necessary to make room for other
ideas and that, if nothing else, is what New Worlds
achieved. And our influence, if that isn't too pompous
a phrase, extended well beyond the SF world in
this country, if nowhere else. We know many rock
musicians who've claimed that New Worlds gave them
the impetus they were looking for, for we know
artists, non-SF writers and poets who think the same.
A lot of our ideas-and, indeed, our contributorsturned
up in the pages of the "alternative" press.
We still meet readers of the large size New Worlds
who tell us it was the only magazine which gave
them any hope or spoke to them in a vocabulary
which made sense to them. And we have possibly
influenced the vocabulary (both in terms of ideas
and language) of SF-broadened its possibilities. Failures?
We claimed too much for what we were doing
in the early days and are only now beginning to see
the results. We never licked the distribution problemuntil
it was too late-and so never reached as many
readers as we might have done. We failed completely
to convince the majority of fans that we felt writers
like Heinlein were short-changing them with bad
writing and simple-minded notions. We failed to improve
the standard of writing in SF, which, in the
main, remains abominable. On the other hand we
offered an alternative to readers who couldn't face
that kind of writing and, of course, we still do.
We've certainly failed to convince the majority of US
publishers concerning the merits of typical New Worlds
fiction for they plainly prefer to publish the sensationalistic
and poorly-conceived SF they have always
published-and their preference doesn't appear to
be dictated by commercial reasoning. We've failed,
perhaps, to produce a large market for the kind of
fiction we like best, but we have produced a large
enough one to make publishing that fiction a viable
proposition (which it wasn't even five years ago).
And, by and large, we've failed to get across to most
SF fans the seriousness of our intentions, the purpose
of our intentions. This again, perhaps, is because
our particular point of view has been obscured
by interpreters. Certainly New Worlds' policy has little
to do with what most US fans would identify as
the "SF New Wave".
Which, I suppose, almost brings us to Jerry Cornelius.
Jerry Cornelius began as a version of Elric of
Melnibone when, in late 1964, I was casting around
for a means of dealing with what I regarded as the
"hot" subject matter of my own time-stuff associated
with scientific advance, social change, the mythology
of the mid-twentieth century. Since Elric
was a "myth" character I decided to try to write his
first stories in twentieth-century terms. The Final
Programme was written, in first draft, in about ten
days in January 1965. It began as a kind of rewrite of
the first two Elric stories, The Dreaming City and
While the Gods Laugh. By doing this I found a style
and a form which most suited what I wanted to
write about. I was elated. I borrowed as much from
the Hammett school of thriller fiction as I borrowed
from SF and I think I found my own "voice" as a
writer. Influences included Ronald Firbank and, to a
minor extent, William Burroughs (two not dissimilar
figures in my estimation). I felt, at the time, that I
had at last found a way of marrying "serious" fiction
with "popular" fiction and I had always believed that
science fiction was the form which could most easily
act, as it were, as the ideal environment in which
this marriage could take place. (This, incidentally,
was the idea which was behind much of the New
Worlds policy). SF knew how to cope with much of
the subject matter and was a vital and popular form
but was largely unable to deal with the traditional
and sophisticated moral questions found in the best
fiction, largely because its accepted forms had denied
any attempt authors might make to incorporate
these questions-the form as it stood distorted and
simplified the problems. Just as Ballard found his
remedy in the form he used for Atrocity Exhibition
and the later stories published from 1965 onwards, I
felt I'd found my remedy in the form I used in The
Final Programme-by using a character who accepted
the moral questions without discussing them (the
dialogue tends to take for granted the reader's familiarity
with the questions and doesn't detail themdoesn't
spell them out) and by supplying the reader
with a straightforward dynamic narrative which he
could enjoy for its own sake. The plot, while being
unimportant, was supplied for those who required a
plot to keep them reading. Moreover, I prefer, in the
main, books with a straightforward plot, too, so I
was trying to produce something I'd enjoy reading. I
was very pleased with the book and thought that
everyone else would enjoy it, too, if only for its
ironies and sensations. A couple of British publishers
asked to see it and surprised me with their strong
reactions-I'd written the book to shock, they said,
and I wouldn't get anywhere like that. It hadn't
occurred to me that the book would do anything but
amuse (if nothing else). I despaired, became cynical,
put the book aside. A copy went out automatically
to my, then, agents, Scott Meredith. In 1967 the
book was bought, enthusiastically, by George Ernsberger,
then an editor at Avon. Parts of it had been
published in New Worlds in 1965 and 1966 as an
experiment in cutting up chunks and putting them
in a different order (a mistake, I now think). By this
time I had begun what was eventually published as
A Cure For Cancer. I had started the book using
another character's name and hadn't got very far
when I realised that this was effectively a sequel to
the Jerry Cornelius novel. I put what I'd written
aside and thought about it all, eventually conceiving
the notion of writing a tetralogy of books about
Jerry, each one expanding upon the various moral
questions raised in The Final Programme. I visited
New York in 1967 and told George Ernsberger about
my scheme and George, was, again, enthusiastic.
Eventually, in 1968, I had a contract from Avon for
the remaining three books. By this time The Final
Programme had been bought by Allison and Busby
who were equally enthusiastic and had also bought
Behold the Man in its novel version. They, too, were
pleased with the tetralogy idea and guaranteed to
publish them in England. It gave me the necessary
encouragement to carry on with A Cure For Cancer
which took, in all, some three years to write, appearing
first as a serial in New Worlds. In 1968, The Final
Programme was published, at the time when Jim
Sallis had come over to work on New Worlds. Jim
read the book and was very enthusiastic about it.
When Lang Jones was commissioned to edit the big
hardback anthology for Hutchinson, The New SF, he
asked me for a story and I decided that I would try
to write a Jerry Cornelius story (this was The Peking
Junction)-developing some of the techniques I was
beginning to feel happy with while working on A
Cure For Cancer. Jim Sallis asked me, then, if I had
any objection to his writing a Jerry Cornelius story
since, in his opinion, the JC stories were a form in
themselves. I had none, of course. He wrote Jeremiad,
which was published in New Worlds. Taking up part
of a theme I'd put into my second JC short, The Delhi
Division, he expanded from there and wrote an entirely
different story. Taking up part of his theme I
wrote it back into Delhi Division, which he'd so far
only seen in rough draft. The Delhi Division was the
first JC short to appear in New Worlds and was quickly
followed by Jeremiad. Once this had happened several
others who had enjoyed The Final Programme felt
that they'd like to do a story about Jerry, so shortly
afterwards there appeared stories by Brian Aldiss,
Norman Spinrad, a poem by Lang Jones, and other
stories by M. John Harrison, Maxim Jakubowski and
one other by me The Tank Trapeze. (Most of these
were eventually published in a book called The Nature
of the Catastrophe (Hutchinson, 1971). In the
meantime I had also begun a comic strip for It, then
the leading underground paper in Britain, with Mal
Dean, who had illustrated many of the JC stories.
The It strip sent up many of the current obsessions
of the underground-the mysticism, the political naivete
and so on. We began to alternate, with Mike
Harrison and Richard Glyn Jones taking up our
themes and us taking up their themes turn by turn.
The strip ran for about a year in It as The Adventures
of Jerry Cornelius, The English Assassin. Part of the
strip was also published in The Nature of the Catastrophe.
In our terms we found a cool way of dealing with
hot material. The essence of the stories is their irony,
their attempts to concentrate as much information as
possible into as small a space as possible, their obsession
with contemporary imagery, their strong reliance
on metaphorical imagery drawn from many
disparate sources-pop music, astronomy, physics,
cybernetics, etc. They are, ideally, deeply serious in
intention. Unfortunately many critics have missed
the serious points of the stories, even if they've
found the stuff entertaining. Sexual ambiguity, for
instance, is taken for granted in the JC stories-a fact
of life-but critics continue to see that element, among
others, as "daring". In this country, at any rate, the
stories receive their most intelligent responses from
that section of the public most at ease with what's
these days called the "alternative' society, was earlier
called "beat" and before that called "bohemian"
-i.e. people who by and large do take certain things
for granted which are regarded as shocking by the
average middle-class person. I'm not here suggesting
that this is good or bad, but it is a fact. Judy
Merril, for instance, regarded The Final Programme as
an "evil" book. Other people have expressed similar
reactions. I find them almost impossible to understand.
Perhaps people will get a better idea of the JC
novels when the whole tetralogy is complete. The
English Assassin will be out in England this year,
after three years in the writing. I don't know when
the last book, The Condition of Muzak, will appearprobably
in a couple of years, maybe three or four.
I'll just have to wait patiently until then. At present,
while having reservations about the first two books,
I'm very satisfied with Assassin-it's the first book of
mine I've been able to proof-read without wincing
all the way through. Presumably Holt Reinhardt,
who did Cure, will be doing Assassin in the States
sometime next year. I haven't had any information
either from Avon or from Holt, as yet. Maybe Final
Programme will get its points across better as a film.
The rights have been bought and the script written
and it's being produced by the company who did
Performance (which has something in common with
Final Programme). I heard Jagger turned down the JC
part as being too freaky and I don't know if the film
ever will be made, but it would be interesting to see
how the public reacted to it. I think the JC stories
have matured considerably since Final Programmebecoming
better written and more complex-and it
does disappoint me when people don't enjoy them or
find them obscure. I remember the delight I felt at
producing a book which I was sure everyone would
find at very least entertaining. I was puzzled when
some people reacted in a puzzled or even antagonistic
way. My own wavelengths changed somewhere
at some time. These days, for instance, I can't understand
SF-I read the words and they no longer
mean anything to me, even when written by a writer
I used to enjoy. So I suppose I can appreciate how
people feel when they find a JC story they can't
focus on. It isn't incidentally, anything to do with
radical alterations in life-style on my part. It just
happened at some point. Ho hum.
(Letter to reader)
In Lighter Vein
A Note on the Jerry Cornelius Tetralogy
PART of my original intention with the Jerry Cornelius
stories was to "liberate" the narrative; to leave it
open to the reader's interpretation as much as
possible-to involve the reader in such a way as to
bring his own imagination into play. The impulse
was probably a result of my interest in Brecht-an
interest I'd had since the mid-fifties.
Although the structure of the tetralogy is very
strict (some might think over-mechanical) the scope
for interpretation is hopefully much wider than of a
conventional novel. The underlying logic is also very
disciplined, particularly in the last three volumes.
It's my view that a work of fiction should contain
nothing which does not in some way contribute to
the overall scheme. The whimsicalities to be found
in all the books are, in fact, not random, not mere
conceits, but make internal references. That is to
say, while I strive for the effect of randomness on
one level, the effect is achieved by a tightly controlled
system of internal reference, puns, ironies,
logicjumps which no single reader may fairly be
expected to follow.
Thus, in a scene in Condition of Muzak (the end of
the section called "Outcast of the Islands"), there is a
short discussion about the Japanese invasion of Australia
and Jerry makes a reference to big egoes and
Hitler. Shakey Mo then asks if he was a character in
a children's comic and then immediately asks if Hitler
wasn't a police chief they'd met in Berlin. The
first reference is to Big Ego (a cartoon ostrich in The
Dandy or The Beano); the second reference is to an
earlier story of mine (a "key" story, in my view)
called The Pleasure Garden of Felippe Sagittarius (where
Hitler was a rather pathetic police chief in an imaginary
Berlin), leading to a reference to the fact that
the historical Adolf Hitler doesn't exist in this world.
All this happens in a couple of sentences or so and
should give the effect, among others, of time in a
state of flux, men in a state of introverted confusion,
close to fugue, and so on. But its internal logic is
straightforward: the two characters know exactly what
they are talking about. To "explain" all this, to
editorialise, would be to break the mood, break the
dramatic tensions, and ruin the effect I was trying to
achieve. The apparent obscurity should not confuse
the reader because the narrative should be moving
so rapidly that he shouldn't care if he doesn't understand
every reference. Similarly, if he was watching
a richly textured film, he would not expect to perceive
consciously every detail of every scene, dialogue,
music, etc. They are maintained primarily by
a complicated series of prefiguring images which are
developed as the book progresses.
(Note to bibliography)
The Stone Thing
1975
A Tale of Strange Parts
Our OF the dark places; out of the howling mists; out
of the lands without sun; out of Ghonorea came tall
Catharz, with the moody sword Oakslayer in his
right hand, the cursed spear Bloodlicker in his left
hand, the evil bow Deathsinger on his back together
with his quiver of fearful rune-fletched arrows,
Heartseeker, Goregreedy, Soulsnatcher, Orphanmaker,
Eyeblinder, Sorrowsower, Beanslicer, and several
others.
Where his right eye should have been there was a
jewel of slumbering scarlet whose colour sometimes
shifted to smouldering blue, and in the place of his
left eye was a many-faceted crystal, which pulsed as
if possessed of independent life. Where Catharz had
once had a right hand, now a thing of iron, wood
and carved amethyst sat upon his stump; ninefingered,
alien, cut by Catharz from the creature
who had sliced off his own hand. Catharz' left hand
was at first merely gauntleted, but when one looked
further it could be observed that the gauntlet was in
fact a many jointed limb of silver, gold and lapis
lazuli, but as Catharz rode by, those who saw him
pass remarked not on the murmuring sword in his
right hand, not on the whispering spear in his left
hand, not on the whining bow upon his back or the
grumbling arrows in the quiver; neither did they
remark on his right eye of slumbering scarlet, his left
eye of pulsing crystal, his nine-fingered right hand,
his shining metallic left hand; they saw only the
fearful foot of Cwlwwymwn which throbbed in the
stirrup at his mount's right flank.
The foot of the Aching God, Cwlwwymwn Rootripper,
whose ambition upon the old and weary
Earth had been to make widows of all wives; Cwlwwymwn
the Striker, whose awful feet had trampled
whole cities when men had first made cities; Cwlwwymwn
of the Last Ones, Last of the Last Ones,
who had been driven back to his island domain on
the edge of the world, beyond the Western Ice, and
who now came limping after Catharz screaming out
for vengeance, demanding the return of his foot,
sliced from his leg by Oakslayer so that Catharz
might walk again and continue upon his doomladen
quest, bearing weapons which were not his protection
but his burden, seeking consolation for the guilt
which ate at his soul since it was he who had been
responsible for the death of his younger brother,
Forax the Golden, for the death of his niece, Libia
Gentleknee, for the living death of his cousin, Wertigo
the Unbalanced, seeking the whereabouts of his lost
love, Cyphila the Fair, who had been stolen from
him by his arch-enemy, the wizard To'me'ko'op'r,
most powerful, most evil, most lustful of all the
great sorcerers of this magic-clouded world.
And there were no friends here to give aid to
Catharz Godfoot. He must go alone, with shuddering
terror before him and groaning guilt behind him,
and Cwlwwymwn, screaming, vengeful, limping
Cwlwwymwn, following always.
And Catharz rode on, rarely stopping, scarcely
ever dismounting, anxious to claim his own vengeance
on the sorcerer, and the foot of Cwlwwymwn,
Last of the Last Ones, was heavy on him, as well it
might be for it was at least eighteen inches longer
.than his left foot and naked, for he had had to
abandon his boot when he had found that it did not
fit. Now Cwlwwymwn possessed the boot; it was
how he had known that Catharz was the mortal who
had stolen his green, seventeen-clawed limb, attaching
it by fearful sorcery to the flesh of his leg. Catharz'
left leg was not of flesh at all, but of lacquered cork,
made for him by the People of the World Beneath
the Reefs, when he had aided them in their great
fight against the Gods of the Lowest Sea.
The sun had stained the sky a livid crimson and
had sunk below the horizon before Catharz would
allow himself a brief rest and it was just before dark
that he came in sight of a small stone cottage, sheltered
beneath terraces of glistening limestone, where
he hoped he might find food, for he was very hungry.
Knocking upon the door he called out:
"Greetings, I come in friendship, seeking hospitality,
for I am called Catharz the Melancholy, who
carries the curse of Cwlwwymwn Rootripper upon
him, who has many enemies and no friends, who
slew his brother, Forax the Golden, and caused the
death of Libia Gentleknee, famous for her beauty,
and who seeks his lost love Cyphila the Fair, prisoner
of the wizard To'me'ko'op'r, and who has a
great and terrible doom upon him."
The door opened and a woman stood there. Her
hair was the silver of a spiderweb in the moonlight,
her eyes were the deep gold found at the centre of a
beehive, her skin had the pale, blushing beauty of
the tea-rose. "Welcome, stranger," said she. "Welcome
to all that is left of the home of Lanoli, whose
father was once the mightiest in these parts."
And, upon beholding her, Catharz forgot Cyphila
the Fair, forgot that Cwlwwymwn Rootripper limped
after him still, forgot that he had slain his brother,
his niece, and betrayed his cousin, Wertigo the
Unbalanced.
"You are very beautiful, Lanoli," he said.
"Ah," said she, "that is what I have learned. But
beauty such as mine can only thrive if it is seen and
it has been so long since anyone came to these
lands."
"Let me help your beauty thrive," he said.
Food was forgotten, guilt was forgotten, fear was
forgotten as Catharz divested himself of his sword,
his spear, his bow and his arrows and walked slowly
into the cottage. His gait was a rolling one, for he
still bore the burden that was the foot of the Last of
the Last Ones, and it took him some little time to
pull it through the door, but at length he stood
inside and had closed the door behind him and had
taken her in his arms and had pressed his lips to
hers.
"Oh, Catharz," she breathed. "Catharz!"
It was not long until they stood naked before one
another. Her eyes travelled over his body and it was
plain that the eyes of scarlet and crystal were lovely
to her, that she admired his silver hand and his
nine-fingered hand, that even the great foot of
Cwlwwymwn was beautiful in her sight. But then
her eyes, shy until now, fell upon that which lay
between his legs, and those eyes widened a little,
and she blushed. Her lovely lips framed a question,
but he moved forward as swiftly as he could and
embraced her again.
"How?" she murmured. "How, Catharz?"
"It is a long tale and a bloody one," he whispered,
"of rivalry and revenge, but suffice to say that it
ended in my father, Xympwell the Cruel, taking a
terrible vengeance upon me. I fled from his court
into the wastes of Grxiwynn, raving mad, and it was
there that the tribesmen of Velox found me and took
me to the wise Man of Oorps in the mountains
beyond Katatonia. He nursed me and carved that for
me. It took him two years, and all through those two
years I remained raving, living off dust and dew and
roots, as he lived. The engravings had mystical significance,
the runes contain the sum of his great
wisdom, the tiny pictures show all that there is to
show of physical love. Is it not beautiful? More beautiful
than that which it has replaced?"
Her glance was modest; she nodded slowly.
"It is indeed, very beautiful," she agreed. And
then she looked up at him and he saw that tears
glistened in her eyes. "But did it have to be made of
Sandstone?"
"There is little else," he explained sadly, "in the
mountains beyond Katatonia."
(From The Outcast of Kitzoprenia
Volume 67 in The History of the
Purple Poignard)