A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 3 -
O
INTRODUCTION
LD HROLMAR IS a bastion of culture
within grim Vilmir, and stands as one of
the greatest cities the Young Kingdoms
will ever see. Yet it is a city under siege. While
the machinations of Law and Chaos threaten its
stability from within, far greater dangers are
massed outside its walls. Neither King Naclon of
Vilmir, nor the powerful Cardinal Garrick of the
Church of Law, look favourably upon Old
Hrolmar, and its bravely independent ruler,
Duke Avan Astran. Sadly the duke is fated to be
slain by Elric of Melniboné within a few short
years, after which the city’s glory will quickly
fade as the inexorable weight of Vilmirian
tradition is brought to bear upon its citizens. This
book however, is set before those unhappy days,
during the city’s brief renaissance, when the
duke and his ideals reign and all is good within
Old Hrolmar.
This monograph contains a complete guide
to the Vilmirian city of Old Hrolmar, including
its history, major locations and important
residents. Like all supplements for the
Stormbringer game published to date, this
monograph is set in the year 399 YK, the year
preceding
Elric’s
coronation as
the 428th
Emperor of
Melniboné.
Most of
the material
presented
within Old
Hrolmar is for the Gamemaster’s eyes only.
Players should make every endeavour to avoid
reading this book least the knowledge they gain
lessen their pleasure in learning the city’s secrets
as they are presented during the course of the
game.
Naturally the Gamemaster may wish to
share some of the information within with any
player whose character is a native of Old
Hrolmar, although care should be taken to
ensure that only the information described in
ORIENTATION (which represents items of common
knowledge about the city) is presented to them.
Even then it would be wise for the Gamemaster
to keep the information discussed in the ‘Future
Events’ section a closely guarded secret.
CONCERNING MICHAEL
MOORCOCK’S CHRONOLOGY
It should be noted that the vision of Old Hrolmar
as described in this book differs in one important
respect from the chronology laid out by Michael
Moorcock in the early volumes of his passionate,
furiously-written and sometimes contradictory
Elric Saga.
The
adventurerexplorer

Duke Avan
Astran is
introduced to
readers in the
second book
of the saga,
The Sailor On The Seas Of Fate, before being
swiftly killed off in the same volume. Curiously
enough, in the fourth book of the saga, The
Vanishing Tower, Elric passes through Old
This rich city was a great meeting place for all the
imaginative people of the Young Kingdoms. To it came
explorers, adventurers, mercenaries, craftsmen,
merchants, painters and poets for, under the rule of
the famous Duke Avan Astran, this Vilmirian city state
was undergoing a transformation in its character.
THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 4 -
Hrolmar several years later and Duke Avan is, at
least from the description Moorcock provides,
apparently very much still alive.
The primary author of this book has elected
to streamline this confusing chronology, so that
Duke Avan’s death in 402 YK is absolute, an
event which initiates the city’s rapid decline. In
the saga as presented in the Stormbringer roleplaying
game, Elric still visits Old Hrolmar in
later years, but the city has long since declined,
and Avan’s exploits are but a treasured memory.
As well as eliminating any continuity errors,
this situation has the added advantage of adding
to the air of impending doom that hangs over the
city; an outlook that is entirely in keeping with
the overall tone of the Elric Saga.
Gamemasters who disagree with this
decision are invited to use this book as it is
presented, but to allow Duke Avan’s vision for
the city to live on after his death. In such a
campaign, Old Hrolmar remains a beacon of
hope in Vilmir until it is consumed by Chaos
during the earth’s last days. Alternatively, Carl
Pates suggests that an imposter may reign after
the real Duke Avan’s death, ruling in his name
and being, to all appearances, the same man. In
this instance, it is only if the adventurers stumble
upon Avan Astran’s grave in the Unmapped
Continent (as described by Moorcock in The
Sailor on the Seas of Fate) that they will they start
to wonder what or who the imposter really is.
Should a Gamemaster wish to explore this
option, the identity of this other Avan is in their
hands…
WHAT IS IN THIS BOOK?
Old Hrolmar is divided into six chapters:
• ORIENTATION provides an overview of the
city’s history, geography, climate, culture,
laws and regulations, and also discusses
such issues as how adventurers might find
employment and accommodation upon their
arrival in Old Hrolmar.
• PLOTS AND POWERS outlines some of the
major factions at work in Old Hrolmar
during Duke Avan’s reign.
• THE GAZETTEER details Old Hrolmar’s six
main districts, describing many of the
significant locations and individuals the
adventurers can encounter during their
explorations of the city.
• ENCOUNTERS IN OLD HROLMAR presents
a collection of random events and
prospective meetings. From the briefest
discussion in the darkest night, to a chance
meeting that could lead into a new and
exciting adventure, these encounters allow
the Gamemaster to bring Old Hrolmar to
life.
• THE HROLMARLIAN DIGEST provides
statistics for common NPC’s with which to
populate the city’s streets at a moment’s
notice.
• STORY SEEDS is a collection of short
adventure ideas that a Gamemaster can
easily expand into detailed scenarios, with
the application of time and imagination.
Over ten years in the making, this book is
designed to provide a template for future
Stormbringer supplements. Like the Atlas of the
Young Kingdoms Volume One: The Northern
Continent which it complements, Old Hrolmar is
a labour of love which could not have been
written without the support of the authors’ many
friends, as well as the global gaming community
whose passion for role-playing in the worlds of
Michael Moorcock has supported its long
gestation.
CLEAR CREDITS
• Carl Pates devised the travel times listed in
ORIENTATION, provided the Random Events
table in ENCOUNTERS IN OLD HROLMAR, and
laboured long and hard over the city map.
• Andrea Rocci contributed the Greater Cultist
of Slortar, the Tarkeshite Sailor, and the
Quixotic Knight and his Loyal Squire to the
HROLMARLIAN DIGEST chapter.
• Nick Middleton created the Erratic Ilmioran
Sailor, the Disenchanted Noble and the
Cursed Scholar for the HROLMARLIAN DIGEST,
as well as the Reunions In The Dark story
seed.
• Jean-Paul Zukauskas contributed the
Grotesque Cultist of Slortar to the
HROLMARLIAN DIGEST chapter.
• Jason Durall created the Boastful Jharkorian
Sailor.
• David Gordon contributed the demons 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 5 -
Napholix and Cataphaxotl to the
HROLMARLIAN DIGEST.
• Nick Haggar developed the original concept
of grim Vilmir and its Lawful pyramidtemples
in his scenario ‘See Hwamgaarl and
Die’ in the Chaosium publication Sorcerers
of Pan Tang.
• The Mereghn assassins’ order is the creation
of Lawrence Whitaker, and first appeared in
his scenario ‘The Book of Brilliant Things’ in
the Chaosium publication Fate of Fools.
• John R. White contributed the Towering
Pride story seed.
• Numerous other Stormbringer authors and
Gamemasters have contributed ideas and
inspiration for concepts expanded upon in
this volume.
• Richard Watts is responsible for all other
elements of the manuscript, which was
edited and designed by Marcus Bone. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 6 -
F
ORIENTATION
OR A BRIEF SPAN of years Old Hrolmar is
one of the greatest cities in the Young
Kingdoms, and a beacon of tolerance and
creativity in grim Vilmir. Under the reign
of the adventurer-explorer Avan Astran the city
plays host to some of the best and brightest
minds in the Young Kingdoms. Following Duke
Avan’s death at the hands of Elric Womanslayer
in the year 402 YK, the Vilmirian Inquisition and
the Church of
Law waste
little time in
bringing their
will to bear
once more
upon the city and its recalcitrant inhabitants, and
Old Hrolmar’s once-bright light is quickly
extinguished.
From the time Duke Avan ascends the
throne in 395 YK to the year of his death, Old
Hrolmar is a city of adventure, intrigue, scandal
and excitement. It is this period of the city’s
history that this book focuses upon, and in which
the Gamemaster is encouraged to set their
Stormbringer campaign.
HISTORY
The city of Old Hrolmar is enclosed within a
great triangle of masonry that was constructed
almost 400 years ago during the brief reign of Vil
Valario, Vilmir’s first king. This settlement stands
atop the ruins of an older, Melnibonéan
community, traces of which can still be found
during Duke Astran’s reign.
In its earliest days Hrolmar sat on the
fringes of the province then known to the Bright
Empire as Shu-Tha-Mirai. An insignificant hamlet
of human slaves, overlooking the River Hrol, the
community that was to grow into Old Hrolmar,
began life clustered around the family estate of a
minor Melnibonéan noble. It was not until the
destruction of the nearby village of Tormesh,
during the Melnibonéan-Dharzi War, that the
hamlet took
on any
significance,
as those who
survived this
catastrophe
made their way to Hrolmar, doubling the
settlement’s population almost overnight.
Gradually, and thanks in part to the indifference
of their overlords, the village continued to grow,
it residents eking out a living by tilling the rich
soil of the Hrol Vale and by fishing in the nearby
bay. Hrolmar’s Melnibonéan masters, already
reclusive, were rarely seen after the end of the
Dharzi war, and within a few generations they
had retreated to the safety of the Dragon Isle;
their slender towers standing empty for another
500 years before the residents of Hrolmar gained
the courage to tear them down.
By the year 100 IS (In Slavery, i.e. 100
years before the successful rebellion against the
Bright Empire led by Lormyr’s Earl Aubec), due
in part to the Hrol Valley’s gentle climate and
rich fields, Hrolmar’s population had grown to
over five thousand. Soon afterwards a satellite
settlement sprang up on the river’s east bank,
whose residents jokingly dubbed the original
village ‘Old Hrolmar’. Before long the name had
stuck, the city identified as such on one of the
…and then the dawn was rising over the crazy spires
of Old Hrolmar…
THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 7 -
oldest human maps still existing in the
Young Kingdoms - a carefully
illuminated Lormyrian parchment dating
back to 2 YK, that today lies in a fragile
state in the University of Cadsandria.
But the people of ‘Old Hrolmar’
had the last laugh, as the new village
was soon swallowed up by its everexpanding
parent city. Today the
existence of the original New Hrolomar
is lost to all but a handful of Vilmirian
scholars, although its name lives on in
the form of a new settlement growing
outside the city’s walls.
THE RISE OF VILMIR
News of the Lormyrian rebellion
reached Old Hrolmar in what was to
become year 1 of the Young Kingdom’s
Calander, but even then the city’s
citizens saw little reason to take up arms
against the few remaining halfMelnibonéan
slaves who dwelt in the
ancient estate at the heart of the
burgeoning town, tending the empty
towers in the fading hope that their
inhuman masters would one day return.
Indeed, it was not until the coming of
Vil Valario, a fanatical young prophet of
the White Lords, that the people of the
city were roused. Valario walked the
length and breadth of the province in 8
YK, spreading news of Lormyr’s
successes against the Melnibonéans in
battle, urging his countrymen (and
women) to rise up against their
overlords. Incited by his oratory, the
Hrolmarlians tore down the long-empty
Melnibonéan towers that had long
overshadowed their fledgling city.
Today the glass pyramid of Law,
dedicated to Elgis the Gentle, occupies
the site where the last tower once stood.
The soft turf and ancient trees of
neighboring Serenity Park, once part of
the luscious gardens surrounding the
towers, are the only visible traces of
Hrolmar’s old masters.
By 11 YK Vil Vilario’s crusade had
successfully freed the nation, and shortly
afterwards he was crowned the newly
independent country’s first king by a grateful
populace. It was during the brief years of his
reign that King Vil ordered the construction of
FUTURE EVENTS
400 YOUNG KINGDOMS (YK)
• Duke Avan embarks upon his greatest adventure yet: to the lands beyond the
mountains known as the Ragged Pillars to the Unknown East (see the
Chaosium supplement of the same name for more details). He is absent for
almost an entire year, and returns bearing remarkable wealth and many
startling tales to tell.
• In Avan’s extended absence Count Rodrigo spreads rumours that the duke is
in league with Chaos, but nothing arises from this slander. Simultaneously a
small group of Hrolmarlians, mostly residents of the Industrial Quarter, begin
to actively agitate against the foreign-born immigrants working in that part of
the city. The count is seen addressing their meetings on more than one
occasion.
• Late in the year newcomers to the city whisper that a new emperor sits on
the Ruby Throne in Melniboné.
401 YK
• Travelling incognito, Avan Astran journeys with a group of merchants to the
Dreaming City where he purchases, at great cost, a long-sealed casket
containing a mysterious gem, and an ancient map of the south-western
continent purporting to show the location of R’lin K’ren A’a.
• While the duke is away a riot flares in the Foreign Quarter, with the mob
burning down several foreign-owned businesses and lynching at least one
unfortunate Myyrrhn (having hacked off his wings to prevent him from
escaping). Upon his return to the city, the duke savagely punishes the mob’s
ringleaders and bans the anti-foreigner movement. For his role in inflaming
the riots, Count Rodrigo is exiled, although his odious children are allowed
to remain in Old Hrolmar.
402 YK
• Duke Avan seeks out Elric of Melniboné, traveling across two continents in
order to request his aid in exploring the mysterious, unmapped continent
that lies beyond the Boiling Sea. With Elric and Count Smiorgan Baldhead of
the Purple Towns aboard, the Duke’s ship braves the fringes of the Boiling
Sea, where a mysterious sickness claims three of the crew during the
crossing (as described in The Sailor on the Seas of Fate).
• After discovering the lost city of R’lin K’ren A’a, Duke Avan is slain by
Stormbringer, despite Elric’s anguished efforts to restrain his cursed blade.
Much to his joy, the now elderly Rodrigo is at last declared duke, and
returns to the city in triumph. Thereafter the will of Cardinal Garrick is
brought to bear upon Old Hrolmar, and little by little the city’s glory begins
to fade. Towers and spires are torn down and foreigners begin to disappear
from the streets. The Quayside and New Hrolmar districts are allowed to
remain, but only after it is decided that they serve a valuable service to the
crown.
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 8 -
the great, three-sided sandstone walls that
enclose all of Vilmir’s major cities. The many
regulations, which even today govern the
construction of buildings and guide the everyday
affairs of most Vilmirians, were also laid down at
this time, although King Vil Vilario himself was
dead years before the sandstone walls
surrounding Old Hrolmar were eventually
completed.
As the decades passed, the city slowly
grew, for the most part untroubled by war or
Chaos (although like all coastal Young Kingdoms
cities it was occasionally threatened by pirates,
and by raiding parties from other nations). Then
in 200 YK, a great Pikaraydian fleet from the
Southern Continent raided Old Hrolmar, laying
siege to its walls for over a month and sacking
and pillaging the Hrol Valley. The Vilmirian
navy eventually drove the southerners off,
destroying the majority of their fleet in a great
battle off the coast of Dolgar. Consequently the
duke of the day gave orders for a great keep to
be constructed at the southern-most point of the
city, overlooking the bay, which today functions
as the traditional home of Old Hrolmar’s ruler,
looming protectively over the city.
The year 202 YK began with omens of
doom in and around the city: the first day of the
New Year saw the moon turning the colour of
blood, and in the following weeks crops and
herds sickened and died. Then, in the first weeks
of winter, news began to filter down from the
north of a great and terrible army from beyond
the World’s Rim that was sweeping south,
destroying all in its path. Although the Chaos
legion never ventured near Old Hrolmar, many
of the city’s menfolk were conscripted into
armies raised against it, although very few of
them ever returning to their homes and families.
Although the events of 202 YK were
carefully noted in the city’s annals, it was the
year 250 YK that was to become the most
infamous in Old Hrolmar’s long history. This was
the year that the Yellow Plague visited the city,
carried upon a trading vessel from Filkhar. The
ship’s sailors were the first to die, but within a
week of their arrival the sickness had ravaged
the city, respecting neither class nor piety.
Almost half the population died in the following
months, corpses left untouched where they fell
in the streets and rotting in the summer heat.
It was not until winter that the plague
finally left the city. In its wake a great monument
to the many dead was erected in Old Hrolmar’s
cemetery, marking one of several mass graves
where the dead were hastily buried. Other
graves now lost and forgotten dot the city and
with the current craze of excavation and
construction in vogue in Old Hrolmar, it is surely
only a matter of time before one such corpse-pit
or another is uncovered, and the plague is once
more unleashed upon the city.
THE COMING OF DUKE AVAN
Old Hrolmar’s present duke, Avan Astran, was
born in 364 YK, the only child of Duke Culvan
Astran to survive to adulthood. Although
originally the youngest of five, his brothers and
sisters all succumbed to an array of childhood
illness and accidents, so that by the time Avan
was 12 he was the only surviving heir to the
duchal throne. Sent to study in Cadsandria in
379, he instead fell in with a travelling band of
thieves, from who he learnt much about the
ways of the world.
After several years with no news from Avan
his parents sadly declared him dead, and his
uncle Count Rodrigo was named the heir in his
stead. Much to his uncle’s dismay, Avan
returned to Old Hrolmar later that same year, in
the spring of 383 YK, although thereafter he
regularly departed the city on a seemingly
endless series of adventures, often for months at
a time, returning home bearing strange tales and
and even stranger ideas, and in the company of
distinctly unusual companions. His doting
parents encouraged Avan’s eccentricities, and
when Duke Culvan died in 395, the seeds were
already set for the new duke’s innovative reign.
Since Duke Avan took the throne he has
transformed the city both physically and
psychologically. Under his watchful eye the
settlements outside the city’s walls were
legalised, and within months the settlements of
Quayside and New Hrolmar had developed into
their own vibrant communities. Today, while
there are many in the city that privately criticise
the duke and his ‘modern’ ideals, few publicly
deride his rule, save for his aging uncle and his
ambitious cronies. Thanks in part to Avan’s
generous nature, his easy rapport with even the
most common of his subjects, and his reputation 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 9 -
for fairness and honesty, Duke Avan Astran is
much loved by his subjects, and under his rule
the city has thrived.
AN OVERVIEW
Old Hrolmar stands upon a rocky
promontory overlooking the
Straight of Vilmir, at the mouth of
the River Hrol. Thanks in part to its
location on Vilmir’s south coast -
on the trade route to the Purple
Towns - the city has always been
densely populated. In 399 YK Old
Hrolmar is home to some ten
thousand residents, making it one
of the Northern Continent’s largest
cities. (In comparison Ilmar has
barely a population of 40,000;
while in the Southern Continent,
Cadsandria is home to
approximately 60,000 people. The
cities in the Western Lands
conversely are considerably
smaller and less populous).
While the city’s three-sided
wall of dense grey-brown
sandstone protects Old Hrolmar
from attack, it also limits outward
expansion. As a result Old Hrolmar
has become severely overcrowded,
although with the coronation of
Duke Avan Astran this problem has
been partially overcome, with new
settlements now allowed outside
the city walls.
Of these new settlements,
Quayside, to the south of the walls,
is a thriving colony of merchants,
fisherfolk and other seafarers. On
the other side of the city, beyond
the almost lawless Foreign Quarter
(a place where merchants will not
venture without their bodyguards)
and the North Gate, is New
Hrolmar, a district of inns, taverns
and brothels, and the arrival and
departure point for many of
Vilmar’s caravans.
Old Hrolmar’s spiritual heart
is also its physical centre. The glass
pyramid of the Temple of Law
stands beside Serenity Park and the polluted
waters of the Hrol River (situated as it is
downstream from the waterfalls where much of
FUTURE EVENTS, CONT.
• Those residents who resist the return to the ‘old ways’ also begin to
disappear; their bodies sometimes found dumped on the steps of the Temple
of Law as a warning to others who share their views; although most are
never seen again. Behind closed doors, the Inquisition is blamed for these
deaths, but it is never publicly accused of any such crimes.
403 YK
• Most of Old Hrolmar’s best sailors are press-ganged into sailing with the
massive fleet that sacks the Dreaming City. None survive, and their loss
noticeably affects the city’s spirit. Once a place of life and laughter, Old
Hrolmar becomes an increasingly bleak city, its streets echoing with muffled
weeping, and its population consisting largely of widows and orphans.
• This year also sees the beginnings of the Vilmirian Civil War, sparked when
Cardinal Garrick, following King Naclon’s death in the raid on Imrryr,
refuses to recognise Crown Prince Hervis as King.
404 YK
• The Vilmirian Civil War rages on. Many in Old Hrolmar take up arms
against Cardinal Garrick and his puppet king, although ultimately they pay
dearly for their support of the so-called ‘Vilmirian Pretender’.
405 YK
• Elric visits Old Hrolmar at the height of the civil war, staying briefly in one of
the city’s better quayside taverns. After a brief altercation involving a
drunken Moonglum, two treacherous prostitutes from a Foreign Quarter
brothel and an insulted dandy, Elric departs the city for Nadsokor (see The
Vanishing Tower).
406 YK
• Melnibonéan mercenaries led by Dyvim Slorm raid several cities in
Northern Vilmir, although Old Hrolmar is spared their attentions.
• Prince Hervis is excommunicated by Cardinal Garrick and murdered when
the peasantry turns against him. The civil war ends, and the cardinal’s
anointed successor, Lord Harron, is declared the true king of Vilmir. He dies
less than a month later during a battle against the last of the rebels, leaving
Garrick the undisputed regent of Vilmir.
407 YK
• With the founding of New Vilmir in the Unmapped Continent, many of Old
Hrolmar’s criminals, together with the surviving supporters of the Vilmirian
Pretender are shipped to the distant west, to the great lamentation of their
friends and families who remain behind.
• Cardinal Garrick’s newborn nephew, Calvin, is crowned Vilmir’s king.
408 YK
• Old Hrolmar, now a shadow of its former self, is destroyed as the world
ends. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 10 -
the city’s industries are clustered). Set upon a
rocky granite outcrop in the southeast corner of
the city sits the ducal fortress; constructed from
the same sandstone as the city walls, the fortress
perches watchfully above the harbour and the
city.
Strict regulations over the centuries have
directed that most of Old Hrolmar’s buildings be
constructed of the same grey-brown sandstone,
and that no building may stand higher than four
stories, so as not to overshadow the Pyramid of
Law. In the past, these sacred rules have been
strictly observed by the city’s leaders, but since
Duke Avan came to power these regulations
have been relaxed, and the last few years have
seen a flurry of renovations as landlords and
property owners have been freed to individualise
their homes and businesses. From a drab city
where almost every building was of a uniform
height and appearance, Old Hrolmar now
presents a baroque and fanciful skyline of spires,
domes and towers in every stage of construction;
scaffolds, sawing and constant hammering
accompany Old Hrolmar’s renaissance.
The city is also undergoing somewhat of a
cultural rebirth. Under Duke Avan’s enlightened
rule Old Hrolmar is attracting philosophers and
freethinkers from throughout the Young
Kingdoms: artists, astrologers, conjurers and
poets. The streets pulse with life and excitement,
and while not all of her citizens appreciate the
changes sweeping the city, visitors are sure to
find Old Hrolmar a rewarding and stimulating
destination.
Unlike
most
Vilmirian
cities (and
indeed, most
major population centres throughout the Young
Kingdoms) Old Hrolmar is unique in that much
of the city is sewered, thanks in large to its
origins as a Melnibonéan settlement. Although
the sewer system is ancient, and slowly falling
into disrepair, its existence ensures that the city
is cleaner and less noisome that most other
Young Kingdoms’ metropoli, with effluent and
waste flowing underground out into the harbour,
instead of down the middle of every street.
Unfortunately, the districts of New Hrolmar and
Quayside are not yet connected to the sewer
system and waste in these places is flung into the
streets. Likewise, most residences in the
Industrial Quarter are too poor to be able to
afford a connection to the sewerage system and
here open drains flow directly to the river
(further enhancing the district’s unpleasant
atmosphere, while also ensuring that the Hrol
becomes yet even more polluted the further
through the city it flows). It goes without saying
that in Hilltown it is fashionable, as well as
essential, to ensure that every building is
appropriately connected to the city’s ancient
sewers especially if one is to be taken seriously
by one’s well-to-do neighbours.
Manholes opening onto the sewers can be
found at regular intervals along the city’s major
thoroughfares; they provide easy access for those
who wish to cross the city unseen (although the
more recent additions to the sewer system are
generally too narrow to be navigable by
anything larger than a small boy). The oldest
sewers, despite being much larger, are
structurally unsound, and pose a risk to anyone
caught in their infrequent collaspes. In addition,
other, less natural, dangers may also exist
beneath the city’s cobbled streets.
Although Old Hrolmar’s atmosphere is
slightly less foul than most Young Kingdoms’
cities, it is just as dark after sunset. The roofs and
upper stories of buildings block out the stars and
moonlight, and the narrow streets are unlit save
for the occasional guttering torch set outside a
tavern. Most of the city becomes a lightless maze
come evening. Save for patrolling Grey
Defenders
(the city
watch and
militia) and
marauding
gangs of
ruffians, Old Hrolmar’s streets are predominantly
deserted once the sun has set, ensuring that they
are a stage set for adventure.
THE DUCHY OF HROLMAR
Vilmir is divided up into nine semi-autonomous
regions, of which the Duchy of Hrolmar is but
one. Old Hrolmar is the duchy’s capital. The
broad and fertile lowlands of the Hrol Valley
make up much of the duchy, which is bordered
to the west by the bleak hills of Dolgar, and to
the east by the highlands of Uhaio. Unlike much
‘Sir, Old Hrolmar is a civilised city. Gentlemen do not
brawl amongst themselves here.’
A TARKESHITE MERCHANT TO ELRIC, THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 11 -
of Vilmir, Hrolmar’s peasants are predominantly
content and well fed, happy with their place in
society and rarely aspiring to rise above it (an
heretical concept anyway, which in the feudal
theocracy of Vilmir would be punishable by
death in any other duchy).
Please note that additional details about
Vilmir can be found in the Atlas of the Young
Kingdoms Volume One: The Northern
Continent.
CLIMATE
Old Hrolmar’s climate is moderate, tending to
cool, with southerly winds dominating. The
autumn months of Theofric and Aubecian are
crisp and mild, with frosts common in the
mornings. Montfath and Myrsan see clear, crisp
sunny winter days overlapping with relatively
warm but overcast conditions, where the
evenings are noticeably cooler. Snow is virtually
unknown in Old Hrolmar.
Spring days are balmy, sunny, and
occasionally humid. Hot northern winds are
common during the clear, dry and sunny days of
Elordan and Sigmursan, often making conditions
less than pleasant. A refreshing sea breeze
springs up almost every evening regardless of the
season, bringing relief to the city on summer
days.
Rainfall is heavy in winter and autumn,
light but frequent in spring, and uncommon in
summer except on occasional evenings. Of late
the drought affecting all of Vilmir has begun to
make an impact upon the city and its
surrounding farms, orchards and vineyards,
although to what extent it will eventually affect
the city is unknown.
LOCAL PRODUCE
Grapes, tomatoes, onions, oranges, saffron,
olives, cotton, wheat and barley are staple crops
of the region, while the local wineries produce a
magnificent cabernet renowned throughout the
Young Kingdoms. Seafood features heavily in the
diets of the majority of Old Hrolmar’s residents,
while the wealthy also dine on beef (courtesy of
the region’s many herds of cattle), the poor are
restricted to goat, and occasionally pork. Wines
are drunk by all, ale being considered a pauper’s
drink.
LAWS AND CUSTOMS
As in all Vilmirian cities the rule of Law is the
dominant religion in Old Hrolmar. Not even the
duke openly supports any of the other cults.
Avan Astran may be open-minded, and he may
even occasionally invoke Chaos while cursing,
but he is not so foolish as to allow the worship of
Entropy a toehold in his lands; nor is he willing
to openly challenge his king and cardinal on this
position.
While Old Hrolmar has of late taken a
more open view of the Elemental Churches than
elsewhere in Vilmir (worship of the Elements is
banned in every other duchy) there are no
organised cults of the Elemental rulers in the
city. Even in the Quayside district there are only
a few scattered adherents of Straasha, while the
other Elemental rulers are only worshipped
privately by a handful of foreigners.
Most of the city’s residents share the
political and social views of their countrymen
and women, although they are generally more
open to change and new experiences than others
throughout Vilmar. For example, the mentally ill
and disabled are still shunned, although they are
no so cruelly mocked as in Jadmar or Rignariom.
However even this may be changing, as of late
the duke has stirred controversy by stating that
he believes the mad are sick, not cursed by the
gods as commonly believed.
Likewise, emotions among Hrolmarlians are
not so thoroughly repressed as in the other
duchies, and more and more citizens are
beginning to express themselves publicly
(although extreme displays of sorrow, joy or
affection are still frowned upon). Social
restrictions, especially when it comes to
interacting with individuals from other classes,
also remain strongly adhered to, regardless of the
duke’s public flouting of such traditions. The
strict hierarchy of Vilmirian society, and the grim
nature of its people is a source of endless
amusement for other nations, although in
practice such social restrictions are usually more
frustrating than entertaining for visitors to the
country.
Given that Old Hrolmar is a civilised city,
the laws decree that weapons may not be carried
on the streets except by members of the
Vilmirian nobility, (although this law is often
extended to visiting nobles of foreign birth). As
such, all weapons larger than a dagger must be 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 12 -
handed over at the city gates, to be returned on
departure, and while weapons can be hidden
from causal inspection the punishment for
discovery of such a flagrant breach of the law is
incarceration and 10 lashes.
Horses
may only be
ridden by the
nobility;
lesser classes
are restricted
to donkeys and mules, a law which causes no
end of turmoil for caravans at Vilmir’s borders.
Gambling is prohibited, as games of fate
and chance are seen as the work of Chaos.
Despite this proscription however, several
venues in Old Hrolmar cater for those wishing to
place wagers. These include the Seven Stars
tavern in the mercantile district, and the Gift of
Goldar in New Hrolmar.
The greatest crime in Old Hrolmar is
heresy, including blaspheming against the White
Lords, desecrating a temple of Law, and the
worship of Chaos. Convicted heretics are burnt
at the stake in the town square before great
crowds, although few such events have been
held in the city under Duke Avan’s rule. Nobles
convicted of heresy are permitted the grace of
being strangled before incineration; commoners
are burnt alive. Treason against the king or his
appointed emissaries is punished by
incarceration, exile or death by hanging.
Most petty crimes, such as slander, gossip
or public drunkenness, are punished with a stay
in the stocks or a flogging. Murderers are hung;
while thieves are flogged (they also have a hand
amputated, both as punishment and by means of
marking them permanently as a convicted
criminal). Adultery is severely punished, with the
woman having an ear or nose notched or even
sliced off, while men are publicly flogged for the
same crime. Merchants convicted of cheating
their customers are also sent to be whipped, with
repeat offenders being gaoled. Rape, although
difficult to prove, is punished with castration.
Old Hrolmar’s gaol is located in Hilltown,
beside the barracks of the Grey Defenders at the
foot of the ducal fortress. From there prisoners
are marched to the town square, wherein stands
the gallows, as well as stocks for the punishment
of lesser crimes. Those sentenced to hard labour
can be found toiling in the sandstone quarries on
the border of Dolgar, or in its salt mines at Sheff.
A standing army of conscripted men,
known as the Royal Vilmirian Legions, guards
Vilmir’s borders and highways. There are nine
legions in
total, with
4,000 men in
each legion.
A navy, based
in Uhaio,
patrols the coast. Vilmir’s civil laws are upheld
by the Grey Defenders, with punishments
decided by the priests of Donblas.
VILMIRIAN ARCHITECTURE
A traditional Vilmirian building stands a uniform
four storeys high so as not to overshadow the
temples of Law, and is constructed either of
closely fitted sandstone blocks or oven-fired red
brick. Roofs are low-hipped with small eaves,
and are either tiled or shingled, depending on
the wealth of their occupants. Windows are
small and square with heavy sills, while doors
are solid, with thick frames and lintels. A typical
Old Hrolmar street consists of rows of uniform
and a-joining terraces.
In the poorer districts these terraces may be
only one storey high, while in richer or older
districts they are usually built to maximum
height allowed by law. The houses of nobles are
usually set back from the street, hidden behind a
stone or brick wall and a carefully tended lawn.
Kitchen gardens, in which staple foods are
grown, flank many houses in every quarter of the
city.
Since Duke Avan’s rise to power, houses in
Old Hrolmar have begun to sprout towers,
awnings, bay windows, balconies, porticos and
shutters, with the nobility competing to see who
can boast the most impressive and ornamental
architecture.
APPEARANCE AND FASHION
Vilmir’s commoners dress in drab grey tunics
and dresses, mostly of undyed wool, with little
that is decorative or bright about their person.
Merchants and nobility adopt equally drab linen,
usually black, white or grey. Middle and upperclass
males favour tunics, trousers, jackets,
broad-brimmed and low-crowned hats, and
“By Mirath’s cup!”; “By the wisdom of Vallyn!”;
“Tovik’s balls!”
COMMON OATHS OFTEN HEARD IN OLD HROLMAR
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 13 -
heavy boots; their womenfolk commonly dress
in long-sleeved and high-cut dresses,
supplemented with surcoats or aprons, and
bonnets or headscarves, with slippers or sandals
upon their feet.
These plain, puritanical standards of dress
are beginning to be relaxed in Old Hrolmar, with
fabrics of brighter colours starting to be adopted
by the more daring, although the cut and style of
the garments has little changed.
The Grey Defenders are uniformed in slit,
knee-lengths coats of mail and leather armour, a
plain grey tabard, and conical helms with noseguards.
Short swords and javelins are their main
weapons; a kite shield is also carried.
Like most Vilmirians, the folk of Old
Hrolmar tend to be of medium height and build,
with light brown to sandy blonde hair and greybrown
eyes. Both men and women keep their
hair cropped respectably short, with only the
women of the upper classes (who do not have to
labour in field or factory) growing their hair long
(although hair below the shoulder is generally
considered indecent throughout Vilmar -
although in Old Hrolmar this tradition is
being challenged). Facial hair is encouraged
among men, except amongst the priesthood.
MUSIC AND ENTERTAINMENT
Traditional Vilmirian music is stately and
solemn, played on flutes and recorders, and
small drums and tambourines. Of late
however, foreign melodies, instruments and
dances have become all the rage, and
strange voices can be heard raised in song at
all hours of the day and night. Prior to Duke
Avan’s rule, crafts rather than arts, were
valued in Old Hrolmar but today poetry,
song, sculpture and a range of other arts are
both practised and praised.
FESTIVALS
Like all Vilmirians the folk of Old Hrolmar
celebrate several major festivals throughout
the year. Valario’s Day is celebrated in
honour of Vilmir’s founder on the 16th of
Elordan, with a day of fasting and prayer. It is
on this day that Vilmirians give thanks for
their liberation from the inhuman reign of the
Dragon Lords, and for the founding of their
great nation. It is the custom in Old Hrolmar
for the duke to release one prisoner from gaol
during the Valario’s Day celebrations to
symbolise the freedom the blessed Vil Valario
bought to the land, a tradition that Duke Avan
gladly continues.
All Gods’ Day is held on the 20th of
Montfath, and sees painted wooden statues of
the White Lords paraded through the city streets
accompanied by music and mummers.
Individual deities among the White Lords also
have their own festival days.
On the 1st day of Donblan the city
celebrates Donblas’ Day, commemorating the
day White Lord Donblas the Defender is said to
have appeared in visions to Vil Valario, inspiring
his crusade against the rule of Melniboné.
The most important festival in Hrolmar is
the festival of Mirath, also known as the Day of
the Dead, held on the last day of Montfath every
winter. This event honours those who died
during the great plague of 250 YK, and offers
homage to Mirath of the White Hands, who
ended the ravages of the disease after hearkening
to the prayers of the city’s beleaguered citizens.
COMMON VILMIRIAN NAMES
MEN’S FIRST NAMES
Alejandro, Almeyque, Alsen, Alvaro, Amlis, Arnao, Avan,
Avvon, Bartolo, Bastrom, Beltran, Bernardo, Berto,
Borredan, Calvan, Eduardo, Eloy, Elgere, Fausto, Fodric,
Franchist, Garrick, Gaspar, Gerado, Heracio, Hervis,
Holon, Hortun, Jorivol, Leen, Lucero, Manyule, Naclon,
Nogion, Ongar, Ontanon, Pepillo, Pethron, Porico,
Ramiro, Ramonet, Rico, Rodolfo, Rodrigo, Toemas, Toro,
Vil, Vust, Xever, Yann, Zamoro.
WOMEN’S FIRST NAMES
Adelina, Adelita, Aidia, Alejandra, Alma, Anicia, Araceli,
Atania, Aukenia, Beatrisa, Betrik, Carla, Datara, Elisa,
Enna, Estele, Felisa, Galena, Herminia, Hermosa, Ines,
Isahble, Janna, Jeda, Jemma, Lara, Lennara, Marahble,
Marisol, Marriat, Marta, Nalda, Nara, Ninta, Peera,
Shara, Vicenta, Zafra, Zammara.
SURNAMES
Almodo, Arrago, Astran, Bandras, Bicenio, Corruna,
Dassom, Esholta, Ettor, Fornova, Helforth, Jeldan,
Mahlag, Malcon, Marinus, Mulay, Nadal, Nairon, Ramir,
Regalarrado, Salvator, Satigo, Sisinner, Sissinier, Suero,
Trasstram, Valario, Vernaldino, Zagosa. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 14 -
During the Day of Dead it is
traditional for Hrolmarlians to fast
from dusk until dawn, and to visit
the graves of their ancestors to offer
them the food and wine that the
living would ordinarily consume. At
sunset the citizens celebrate life and
survival with feasting and drinking
(one of the few occasions that public
debauchery is tolerated in Old
Hrolmar). Evening also sees a parade
featuring a procession of various
personifications of disease (including
the Yellow King, a skeletal figure
clad in yellow rags) running through
the streets pursued by the priesthood
of Mirath, who wave bright lanterns
and smoking thuribles, and beat
small drums to drive disease away.
THE VILMIRIAN LEGIONS
Nine well-armed, well-disciplined
legions guard Vilmir’s borders from
the incursions of Chaos and the
threat of foreign invasion. The
majority of legionaries are conscripts
whose dedication is ensured by the
threat of corporal punishment, and
the ever-present promise of eternal
damnation should they shirk their
divinely ordained responsibilities. A
steady wage and the luxury of
regular meals assists in maintaining a
legionnaire’s loyalty and morale.
The legions’ officers are
invariably the youngest sons of the
nobility: men who stand to inherit
little from their families due to their
place in the line of succession, and
who thus seek other avenues by
which to amass wealth and
influence. Save for one or two rare
exceptions, the nobility also makes
up the cavalry divisions attached to
each of the nine legions.
The structure of each legion is
identical. The smallest grouping
consists of a body of 10 men known as
shieldmates who share a common tent, a mule,
and cooking utensils. The camaraderie among
shieldmates is legendary. Ten bands of
shieldmates form a century, a body of 100 men
overseen by a junior officer known as a
centurion. Traditionally the most experienced
centurion in a legion, usually the man with the
TRAVEL TIMES
LOCATION TRAVELBY DURATION (DAYS)
Bakshaan (Ilmiora) Land (1000 miles) 28
Banarva (Tarkesh) Ship 14
Belgair (Vilmir) Ship 7
 Land (800 miles) 23
Cadsandria (Argimiliar) Ship 6
Chalal (Pikarayd) Ship 10
Dhakos (Jharkor) Ship 15
Dhoz-Kam (Oin & Yu) Ship 14
Galeazzo (Ilmiora) Ship 10
 Land (1450 miles) 41
Gromoorva (Dharijor) Ship 15
Hwamgaarl (Pan Tang) Ship 7
Ilmar (Ilmiora) Ship 9
 Land (1300 miles) 37
Imrryr (Melnibone) Ship 6
Iosaz (Lormyr) Ship & Land (400 miles) 8/11
Jadmar (Vilmir) Ship 3
 Land (450 miles) 12
Karlaak (Ilmiora) Land (950 miles) 27
Menii (Purple Towns) Ship 5
Ordis (Vilmir)q Land (650 miles) 18
Ramasaz (Lormyr) Ship 8
Raschil (Filkhar) Ship 8
Rignariom (Vilmir) Land (400 miles) 11
Trepesaz (Lormyr) Ship 8
Uhaio (Vilmir) S hip 2
 Land (300 miles) 8
Vilmirian Protectorates Ship 4
 Land (600 miles) 17
Vilmiro (Vilmir) Ship 4
 Land (850 miles) 24
Weeping Waste Land (700 miles) 20
*All sea travel times assume a daily rate of 192 miles per day as per
page 23 of the Stormbringer rules.
*All land travel times are based on an approximate rate of 35 miles
per day as per page 102 of the Stormbringer rules. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 15 -
best grasp of military tactics, is declared the
centurion-major and given command of his
fellow officers. Sadly in Vilmir today the position
of centurion-major is all too often appointed on
the basis of lineage and social status instead of
being determined by the incumbent’s skills.
The basic fighting unit of the legions is a
cohort, comprised of six centuries (600 men and
six centurions). Each Vilmirian legion is
composed of six cohorts (36 centuries and their
centurions, for a total of 3636 men). Added to
these foot soldiers are 300 cavalrymen and their
mounts, and assorted clerks, engineers and other
specialist non-fighting men, bringing the total
number of each legion to 4000 men.
A senior officer known as a legate
commands each legion, dealing most directly
with the centurion-major but usually meeting
with all 36 of the legion’s centurions on a
regular basis. The legate is always an important
or influential nobleman, usually appointed for
political purposes and sometimes lacking even
the most basic military knowledge. Legates are
traditionally appointed for a three-year term, and
are rarely replaced before the end of their tenure
save in cases of extreme incompetence or
sudden death.
The nine legates are appointed by and
receive their orders from Vilmir’s Lord Protector,
a hereditary title held by the Duke of Uhaio. The
current Vilmirian Lord Protector, the Admiral of
the Royal Navy and Commander-General of the
Royal Vilmirian Legions is the arrogant and
argumentative Duke Elgar Esholta, a fervent
adherent of the Lawful cult of Tovik the
Relentless.
Only His Majesty King Naclon III, Duke of
Jadmar, Grand-Marshall of the Vilmirian
Protectorates and Commander-in-Chief of the
Vilmirian Armed Forces ranks higher than the
Lord Protector. In secular matters King Naclon is
the supreme authority in Vilmir, although such is
the power of the Church of Law that even the
king sometimes seems powerless to counter cold
Cardinal Garrick’s ruthless and pervasive
influence.
By law all Vilmirian men must serve a
minimum five years as a legionnaire, or in the
royal navy, upon turning 16. Bribery or influence
often spares the sons of the wealthy and
influential from this obligation.
Men who sign on for further service after
their obligatory five years receive a pay rise and
gain the chance for promotion, although
commoners rarely rise past the lowest ranks in
the legions, such as the signifier (standard
bearers, who are ranked slightly above the rank
and file infantry but well below a centurion),
signaller (responsible for communicating the
legate’s orders to the troops via blasts of their
trumpets or through semaphore) and scribe (a
minor administrator).
Often the most promising legionnaires are
recruited into the ranks of the Grey Defenders at
the end of their period of conscripted service.
Because of this, considerable tensions exist
between the legions and the militia. The Grey
Defenders belittle the legionnaires as being
inferior warriors; the legionnaires view the Grey
Defenders as arrogant and boastful, and worse,
traitors who have betrayed the honour and
bonds of their shieldmates. Due to the fierce
rivalry between the legions and the Grey
Defenders, Duke Avan has relocated the base of
the local 8th Legion to the small town of
Hrolford, 150 miles to the north.
TRAVELLING TIMES
The following table provides the Gamemaster
with a summation of how long the average
journey takes from Old Hrolmar to a variety of
locations in the Young Kingdoms (storms,
pirates, bandits and other hazards not
withstanding). Gamemasters are advised to
consult the Chaosium publication Sailing on the
Seas of Fate for additional details concerning sea
voyages in the Young Kingdoms.
FINDING ACCOMMODATION
An abundance of inns exist in Quayside, New
Hrolmar, the Foreign Quarter, and to a lesser
extent the Merchant’s Quarter. While such
establishments offer many creature comforts, a
private room (or even a bed in a dormitory room)
is a heavy drain upon the purse. Prices in Old
Hrolmar tend to be slightly higher than
elsewhere in Vilmir, although adventurers who
shop around, or who are adept at bargaining,
should be able to find themselves a cheap
enough deal. The cheapest inns charge between 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 16 -
four and six bronzes for the privilege of curling
up in a corner of the taproom, while a bed in a
dormitory can cost anywhere from ten bronzes
in an average Quayside inn, to between fifteen
and twenty in the better class of establishment.
Private rooms start at twelve bronzes in cheap
establishments, while better inns charge an
average 48 bronzes a night for the same service.
The best inns of the city usually charge at least
50 bronze coins a night for a private room, but
this often includes breakfast.
Unless they are unusually wealthy, visitors
in Old Hrolmar must quickly arrange reasonably
priced accommodation, least they find
themselves spending all their bronzes on a bed
instead of food. Beggars may choose to sleep in
doorways or under bridges, but unless the
adventurers are willing to risk arrest or
harassment, this is unlikely to be an option
they’ll consider for very long.
Wealthy adventurers, or those planning on
a permanent or lengthy stay in the city, might
consider buying a room or a house. A worker’s
cottage in the Industrial Quarter may be easily
purchased for between 200 and 400 bronzes,
while a similar cottage in New Hrolmar or
Quayside would sell for twice that. A onebedroom
abode in the Merchant’s Quarter sells
for a minimum of 800 bronzes, while a midsized
house with garden sells for about
10,000 in the same district. If an adventurer
is feeling extravagent, the starting price for a
Hilltown residence is a minimum 25,000
bronzes, with mansions available for as
much as six times that amount.
Renting accommodation is another
viable option. Hovels are available for as
little as 40 bronzes a week; a single room in
a hovel for 5 to 10. A set of rooms in a
tenement building will set an adventurer
back at least 60 bronze; a single room only
15 to 30. A house in the Merchant’s Quarter
can be found for anywhere from 80 to 120 a
week, again a single room cost about 30 to
60; while a Hilltown residence is anywhere
between 100 and 500 bronze coins a week,
or 60 to 200 bronzes for a single room. Most
rental properties come unfurnished; if the
adventurers require furnished rooms they
must expect to pay considerably more.
Several enterprising Hrolmarlians run
boarding houses, providing accommodation
and meals for one or more individuals. These
include the Widow Janna in the Merchant’s
Quarter, and Madam Shara in the Foreign
Quarter, whose domiciles are described in THE
GAZETTEER. The cost of a boarding house is
approximately 10% higher than rental
accommodation in the same district.
Alternatively the adventurers may secure
the kind of work that includes accommodation
as part of their employment conditions, such as
working as the bodyguard or servant of a
merchant or noble.
FINDING EMPLOYMENT
While booty and treasure are sometimes gained
in the course of an adventure, such an income is
unreliable at best, and so finding gainful
employment may be the adventurers’ first
concern once they have secured a roof over their
heads.
The most obvious place to look for a job in
Old Hrolmar is at the labour market located in
the Merchant Quarter’s Grand Bazaar (see THE
GAZETTEER for more details). Almost any line of
work is offered here, although there are always
more hopeful applicants than available positions.
Aspiring workers can also try door to door at the
INCOMES IN OLD HROLMAR
OCCUPATION SALARY (BRONZES/WEEK)
Artisan (apprentice) 40-50
Artisan (journeyman) 50-70
Artisan (master) 70-100
Artist (patronised) 10-40 per 10% skill
Artist (unsupported) 0-15
Foreman/Manager 60-80
Guard 50-65
Grey Defender 65-85
Hospitality (waiter/barkeep) 35-40
Labourer 40-45
Prostitute (streetwalker) 25-50
Prostitute (brothel) 30-60
Prostitute (high class) 65-85
Scribe 50-60
Servant 35-40 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 17 -
city’s bakeries, tanneries, taverns and the like,
while the mills and factories of the Industrial
Quarter always need able-bodied workers to
replace those who have been injured.
Alternatively a scenario may lead the
characters into permanent or part-time
employment, which may in itself generate further
adventures (for example when their employer is
kidnapped or blackmailed, or is secretly a
sorcerer).
Adventurers who practise an accredited
trade, such as masonry or carpentry, must join
the appropriate guild before they will be allowed
to work in Old Hrolmar, and not every trade
welcomes foreigners to the already crowded city
(see the Guildhouse entry in THE GAZETTEER, as
well as the Guilds entry in PLOTS AND POWERS).
The following table lists the average wage a
worker can expect to earn in Old Hrolmar,
although adventurers should not expect such
modern conveniences such as sick leave and
holiday pay to be included as part of their
contract. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 18 -
B
PLOTS AND POWERS
ENEATH ITS PEACEFUL SURFACE Old
Hrolmar seethes with tensions and
intrigues. This chapter outlines the major
forces and agents at work within the city’s walls,
including secret Chaos cults, the Vilmirian
Inquisition, and a shadowy order of assassins.
Details on Old Hrolmar’s political factions,
machinations and feuds, which will no doubt
catch up the adventurers at some stage of any
campaign set in or around the city, are also
discussed
below.
Althoug
h not every
organisation
or agent
discussed in
this chapter
overtly exerts
their influence over Old Hrolmar, Gamemasters
are encouraged to study the following chapter,
and employ the various feuds, factions, villains
and civil tensions it presents in their campaigns.
POLITICAL POWERS WITHIN
OLD HROLMAR
THE ANTI-FOREIGNER FACTION
This growing movement (as yet too amorphous
and disorganised to be called a coherent force)
manifests the vague concerns that many of Old
Hrolmar’s citizens hold concerning the recent
influx of foreigners to their city. Among the most
outspoken members of the faction are the gang
known as the Church Street Boys, who are often
found drinking at the Hawk and Serpent Tavern
in the Industrial Quarter (see THE GAZETTEER).
Certain ambitious nobles, most notably
Count Rodrigo Astran, see the Anti-Foreigner
Faction as a means of advancing their influence
in the city and in the coming years will pour
money into the group’s coffers in order to help
them organise and agitate. As a result, by 401 YK
the faction
will grow
from a loose
confederatio
n of rabblerousers
into
an organised
and violent
movement
targeting any
hapless foreigners they might encounter.
At heart the Anti-Foreigner Faction are a
reactionary group of locals who blame foreigners
and immigrants for the loss of their jobs. This is
unfortunate, as the blame should actually be laid
at the feet of the artisan-priests of Arkyn, and
their increasing mechanization of the city’s
industries. This process of industrialization,
which has been introduced throughout Vilmir,
has gradually lessened the demand for human
labour and lead to a growing number of
unemployed citizens in all of the country’s major
centers, although such an awareness of social
and religious factors is largely beyond the
faction’s thuggish and uneducated members.
Duke Avan himself was a man who had explored most
of the world and brought back great wealth and
knowledge to Old Hrolmar. Its riches and intellectual
life attracted more riches, more intellectuals and so
Old Hrolmar flourished.
THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 19 -
THE GUILDS
Outside of the nobility, Old Hrolmar’s guilds are
the city’s oldest and most powerful political
faction. Membership of the guilds is restricted to
those city-based trades employing artisans and
craftsmen. Because of their need to protect their
sphere of control and keep the buying public
content, every guild rigorously maintains
standards of quality, specifying precise quantities
and measures as well as costs and quality. All
goods are inspected, and visits are paid to guild
members on both a regular and “surprise” basis
in order to enforce these standards.
Regulations concerning guild membership
reflect the small and often familial nature of their
work, while also recognising the need for mutual
aid within the organization - members often
contribute towards such things as the funeral and
wedding expenses of their fellows. A guildsman
who breaks the regulations, through cheating or
the sale of substandard goods, can expect no
such support and will often find themselves
driven out of business.
The most influential guild leaders currently
include:
• Calvan Zagosa: The miserly and waspish
head of the Tailors Guild.
• Guillen Coruna: Florid, and possessed of a
booming laugh, Guillen is the head of the
Slaughtermens Guild.
• Ladron Ramanet: The head of the Vintners
Guild, who oversee the manufacture of wine
in Old Hrolmar, is thin-lipped, abstemious
and puritanical by nature.
• Gutierre Ontanon: Refined, aloof and
scholarly, the head of the Architects &
Surveyors Guild is presently one of the most
powerful men in the city.
• Ettor Vernaldino: A simple man, and the
head of the Bakers Guild
• Lucan Ferando: Loud, lusty and passionate,
Lucan is the head of the Leatherworkers’
Guild, and a master of his craft.
• Ettor Larnaz: The dour head of the Masons
Guild rarely speaks, but when he does, his
comments are never trivial.
• Alonsico Pequino: Highly excitable and
perhaps overly influenced by the priests of
Arkyn, Alonsico is the head of the Weavers
Guild.
• Gaspar Menaute: Short-tempered, ham-fisted
and blunt to the point of rudeness, the head
of the Stonecutters Guild is extremely
influential and most in the city’s elite strive
to keep him on side.
Numerous lesser guilds also exist, including
those for coopers, wheelwrights, printers,
candlemakers and cobblers, but these lack the
power of the larger guilds, whose position in the
city is increased by the size and importance of
their many members. Like any political
organisation, the guilds are turbulent and
unsettled entities, with factional infighting and
intrigue a common occurrence among their
members. Yet for all their internal ructions, one
thing unites the guilds in a common cause: their
opposition to Old Hrolmar’s merchants gaining
any additional influence or power.
More information about the Guild system
can be found in THE GAZETTEER, under the
Guildhouse entry.
THE MERCHANTS
In the years since Duke Avan claimed the ducal
throne, Old Hrolmar’s merchants have increased
their power, thanks mainly to Avan Astran’s
relaxed rule and fondness for imported luxuries.
Among the city’s merchants are included
furriers, wool merchants, importers and traders
in rare and valuable goods, moneylenders, and
the various owners of market stalls, as well as
traders who deal in horseflesh, cattle and other
beasts.
The tensions between the city’s merchants
and the guilds prevent Old Hrolmar’s
commercial sector from becoming a united and
mighty power, capable of demanding the sorts of
freedoms currently developing in neighbouring
Ilmiora.
Old Hrolmar’s most influential merchants
include:
• Austere Gavriel Marccin, whose fleet of
ships imports cattle and other livestock from
across the Young Kingdoms, specialising in
Shazarian thoroughbreds for Vilmir’s
nobility.
• The elderly spice merchant and black
marketeer Pascuale Janucho, a secret
worshipper of Slortar. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 20 -
• Carlo Forli, an ambitious Ilmioran who
chafes at Vilmir’s social restrictions but who
makes personal sacrifices in order to exploit
Old Hrolmar’s new economy and fill his
coffers.
• The corpulent Bartolo Golarte, who made
his fortune importing and exporting fine
wines and sherries, and who, much to his
family’s concern, looks set to drink his way
through the profits.
• Perico Salazar, whose deeply traditional
outlook has seen him struggle to maintain
his position in the new economy of luxury
items flooding the Hrolmarlian marketplace.
• Savastian Velasco, a young man who, less
than a year ago, inherited his father’s
business, and has already doubled the family
fortunes, thanks to his willingness, in the
most part, to trade with the inhuman folk of
Melniboné.
Like their rivals in the artisans’ guilds, while
Old Hrolmar’s merchants present a united public
face, they are riven by internal dissent and
factionalism.
THE NOBILITY
Two main factions exist within Old Hrolmar’s
noble families, those who support the duke and
his changes, and those who seek a return to the
traditions that Avan flouts.
However, things are not quite as black and
white as they seem, with some of the duke’s
closest and most trusted supporters quite
uncomfortable about the changes he brings to
the city. Other nobles, who may be personally
disposed against Avan because of old blood
feuds, find delight in the new life his rule has
brought to Old Hrolmar. Within each group,
factionalism creates many opportunities for
conflict and drama that Gamemasters and
adventurers alike can exploit to their own ends.
The most prominent member of the antiAvan
faction is the duke’s own uncle, Count
Rodrigo Astran, whose lust for the ducal throne
is common knowledge amongst all Hrolmarlians.
Numbered among the count’s closest supporters
are:
• His son, Earl Eduardo Astran, who seems
more interested in gambling and whoring
than in serving his increasingly frustrated
father’s will.
• Captain Franchist Fernando, the count’s
illegitimate son, and the commander of the
East Gate.
• The spineless and sycophantic Lord Juliau
Valerino who is forever to be found in the
count’s shadow, and his wife the Lady
Herminia, equally sycophantic although far
more wilful.
• Baron Zamoro Vadrigal, heir to the Duchy of
Vilmiro, a young, cold, and classical
Vilmirian noble who has only recently
arrived in Old Hrolmar.
• The bloodless Lord Garçilaso Domingo, a
pale widower who is well known for the
short life-span of his slaves and the
scandalous behaviour of his children.
• Lady Forstina Regalarrado, a sour old
woman who long ago appointed herself the
moral barometer of Old Hrolmar, and whose
husband happily gave himself over to the
peace of Mirath of Law several decades ago.
• The dowager Duchess Lennara Astran, who
while publicly supporting her son Avan, is
privately known to fear for his soul in light of
the changes he has brought to the city.
• Captain Artimio Guerrero, commander of the
North Gate, whose xenophobic outbursts
have won him Count Rodrigo’s ear.
Against these bastions of Vilnarian tradition
and power are the duke’s supporters, including
many, but not all, of the city’s younger nobility,
and the majority of merchants and guild masters
who have gained from his rule. Most prominent
in their support for Duke Avan are:
• Lady Nina Aracella, the richest woman in
the city, a devoted patron of the arts, and
advocate of the cultural renaissance the
duke has brought to the city.
• Her rival, Lady Atania Almodo, who aspires
to marrying Duke Avan, and whose recent
inheritance has provided her with the wealth
to match her dreams.
• The dashing Captain Toemas Satigo,
commander of the South Gate.
• Colonel Calvan Guerrero, the commanding
officer of the Grey Defenders, who, although
he holds grave concerns about the duke’s
rule, serves him faithfully nonetheless. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 21 -
• On the rare occasion he looks beyond his
gardens and specimens, Viscount Mendo
Ferrand proudly supports the duke, whom he
counts as a close personal friend with an
inquiring
mind to
match
his own.
• The
forceful
greybear
d Sir
Augustin Timoteo, scion of one of the oldest
families in the city. He is a staunch
nationalist who believes that a revitalised
Vilmir can become a major power in the
Young Kingdoms, and that conservative
forces will doom his nation if they are not
stopped.
Statistics for some of these nobles are
presented in THE GAZETTEER. Gamemasters are
invited to use the generic noble’s statistics in the
HROLMARLIAN DIGEST, where individual entries do
not exist.
THE FORCES OF CHAOS
Ironically, as Duke Avan has striven to reduce
the stultifying influence of Law in Old Hrolmar,
so have the forces of Chaos increased their
footing in the city. Among the dark powers
active in Old Hrolmar are counted the agents of
Urish, the Beggar-King of Nadsokor, and several
abominable Chaos cults.
THE BEGGARS OF OLD
HROLMAR
To a degree, the Vilmirian state has turned a
blind eye to the existence of an organised
community of beggars in its midst, for the
existence of a beggars’ ‘guild’ relieves the
Vilmirian government from the burden and
expense of coping with street-dwellers. Instead
the onus falls upon the nation’s citizens, many of
whom (especially shopkeepers) pay beggars not
out of the goodness of their hearts, but to
encourage them to move on. Without an
organised system of alms for the poor, beggars
have been forced to organise themselves in order
to maximise the extraction of coinage and
foodstuffs from ‘decent’ people, and to establish
their own social hierarchy.
In
another
world this
order may
have even
been a good
and decent
one, but the
Beggar-Kings of Nadsokor have long been thralls
of Chaos, and Urish the Seven-Fingered is no
exception. Under his degenerate rule, all beggars
are forced to tithe fifty percent of their earnings
to Nadsokor. The punishment for failure to
comply is death.
RAMIREZ THE PUSTULANT
The current leader of Old Hrolmar’s beggars is
Ramirez the Pustulant, a vile creature whose
base of operations is the structure in the dark
heart of the Foreign Quarter known as Rat’s
Castle. Although he has neither brute strength
nor sorcery at his disposal, his wit, wiles and
animal cunning have ensured his safety in a cutthroat
world. Much of his lean body is covered
with an intricate and finely-inked tattoo that
forms the binding, to his very skin, of a demon of
the Ystrych breed. Search rolls or Witch Sight
allows astute adventurers to detect evidence of
the demon’s presence, as Ramirez’s skin
occasionally ripples and moves of its volition.
The demon, which was summoned and bound
by a sorcerous ally of Ramirez many years ago,
has a wardpact against swords, thus rendering
the beggar-lord invulnerable tomost bladed
weapons (including rapiers, falchions and
scimitars, but not daggers and dirks).
RAMIREZ THE PUSTULANT
BEGGAR LORD, AGE 33
CHAOS 45, BALANCE 3, LAW 7
STR 10, CON 14, SIZ 12, INT 14, POW 14, DEX 10,
APP 4
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: Soft Leather (No
Helm), 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
Weapon Skill Damage
Shortsword 50% 1d6+db
Dagger 55% 1d4+2+db
A sliver of luck there was in the Unbreakable Law
which governed both Law and Chaos and forbade
them direct attack upon men. They had to use human
agents for their work.
THE BANE OF THE BLACK SWORD, EPILOGUE 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 22 -
SKILLS: Beg 90%, Bargain 75%, Conceal Object 70%,
Divert Blame 85%, Evaluate 80%, Insight 65%, Oratory
45%, Pick Lock 50%, Search 65%
RAMIREZ THE PUSTULANT’S DEMON
Bound into his skin, this demon of the Ystrych breed
protects Ramirez from swords via its wardpact.
INT 7 POW 12
ABILITY: Wardpact, Against Swords.
Unfortunately, the demon’s need is to be
bathed in excreta once a week and as a
predictable side effect Ramirez is plagued by a
particularly horrid skin disease: his whole body
is covered in open, weeping sores. Much of his
hair has fallen out and the few random tufts that
remain are greasy and grey, flecked with faecal
matter. His beard too is patchy, and matted with
congealed food-scraps. He stinks of excrement
and stale sweat.
Nevertheless Ramirez is quick-witted and
sadistic, and an apparently faithful servant of
King Urish, although his greed often gets the
better of him, and he regularly hides certain
choice trinkets in his rooms instead of sending
them on to Nadsokor. On the occasions that
King Urish questions the lack of wealth flowing
from Old Hrolmar, Ramirez blames other
beggars for trying to hide their profits, usually
killing them before they have had a chance to
protest their innocence.
OTHER BEGGARS
Almost a hundred beggars call Old Hrolmar
home. Among them are numbered Ramirez’s
three most trusted agents, known as his Eyes,
Ears and Hands.
THE EYES - LEGLESS LUDOVICO,
CORPULENT BEGGAR, AGE 47
Legless Ludovico is a flatulent, grossly fat Ilmioran whose
legs were lost in a mining accident many years ago. His
flabby bulk overflows the small, wheeled platform that is
his main form of transport, although his beefy arms are
surprisingly strong from the years of pushing himself
around. Little escapes his gaze.
CHAOS 31, BALANCE 7, LAW 9
STR 13 CON 16 SIZ 16 INT 10 POW 8 DEX 5 APP 5
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Carving Knife 40% 1d6+db
SKILLS: Beg 60%, Bargain 55%, Break Wind 95%, Conceal
Object 45%, Evaluate 60%, Hide 30%, Insight 35%, Move
Quietly 30%, Search 80%, Whine 65%
THE EARS - MAD MEG,
HARRIDAN, APPARENT AGE 60
Originally from the Purple Towns Mad Meg is a deranged
and bedraggled hag who rarely speaks anything but
gibberish. She has not washed in living memory, and as a
result smells so foul that anyone trapped in a room with
her must make a CONx5 roll to keep the contents of their
stomach down. She makes a living by following people
about, muttering unintelligibly and shrieking wildly until
they pay her to go away. When not otherwise engaged it
is her habit to sit in shop doorways picking at her long,
yellow toenails. Although she says little that is sensible,
she overhears a great deal. Ramirez long ago leaned the
key to encourage sensible speech from her, which is to
ply her addled brain with opium and garbleweed. Under
their influence she is calm and coherent, but when the
drugs wear off her lunacy descends anew.
CHAOS 40, BALANCE 11, LAW 5
STR 7, CON 13, SIZ 8, INT 11, POW 15, DEX 16,
APP 7
HIT POINTS: 11 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 65% 1d3+db
SKILLS: Beg 35%, Conceal Object 50%, Hide 40%,
Insight 40%, Listen 85%, Move Quietly 30%, Penetrating
Shriek 100%, Search 35%
THE HANDS - RAT-BOY
 STREET URCHIN, AGE 9
Although his real name is Geft, none have called him that
since his parents died three years ago. With no relatives
to claim him the boy was turned out onto the streets,
where his heart was hardened by the countless cruelties
he suffered. Only the beggars showed him any warmth,
and only then when they wanted something from him.
His only real friends now are the rats he has trained.
Rat-Boy, as the other beggars call him, has a supernatural
affinity with his pack of seven rodents, who obey his
every command. He is small enough to be able to worm
into most enclosed spaces, and where he cannot reach,
his rats can. Thanks to the only spell he knows, he can
also see what his rats are seeing even when they are not
in the same room as him.
CHAOS 19, BALANCE 4, LAW 3
STR 7, CON 7, SIZ 6, INT 13, POW 17, DEX 17,
APP 8
HIT POINTS: 7 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 55% 1d3+db
SPELLS: Rat Vision (1)
SKILLS: Beg 45%, Climb 70%, Commune With Rats 50%,
Conceal Object 60%, Dodge 50%, Evaluate 40%, Hide
50%, Insight 30%, Jump 45%, Listen 55%, Move Quietly
50%, Pick Lock 45%, Search 35%, Train Rats 90%
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 23 -
NOTES: Around his filthy neck, on a thin leather strip,
geft wears a small bronze pendant, the only thing he has
to remind him of his parents. It is engraved with a
mysterious rune that skilled sorcerers may recognise as
the pictographic name of Skweeeeeee, the Beast-Lord of
Rodents, although geft is unaware of its significance.
RAT PACK
If attacking as a pack, the rats have a 10% chance of
successfully biting for 1D3 damage per round (5% higher
than the standard pack) as Rat-Boy has trained these
particular rats to attack on his command. The sensation of
a swarm of chittering rats climbing all over an adventurer
will have the effect of reducing his or her skills by 10%
while under attack.
Working as a team, the rats are capable of dragging
objects with a SIZ of less than 3, and in this manner can
be used to retrieve keys, parchments and other small but
valuable items for their master’s lord.
SKILLS: Eyes Gleam 65%, Scurry And Chitter 90%
THE BEGGARS OF OLD HROLMAR
If the Gamemaster requires additional beggars, this
generic pack of scrofulous, deformed and vile characters
should suffice. One is tongueless; two limp on crutches;
another is hideously scarred; the last is a hulking,
moronic brute. All are malformed of mind, and vile
servants of Chaos who worship either Narjhan or
Checkalakh.
STATISTICS #1 #2 #3 #4
STR 8 10 9 12
CON 15 12 7 14
SIZ 10 9 15 12
INT 5 8 9 18
POW 7 9 5 11
DEX 17 11 12 9
APP 3 5 7 5
HP 13 11 11 13
DB: 0 0 0 0
Weapons Skill Damage
#1 - Brawl 65% 1d3+db
#2 - Dirk 55% 1d4+db
#3 - Cestus 50% 1d3+db
#4 - Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
Armour: Protection
#1 - None Nil
#2 - None Nil
#3 - None Nil
#4 – Soft Leather 1d6-1
SKILLS: Beg 55%, Dodge 65%, Grovel 70%, Hide 50%,
Move Quietly 45%, Search 55%
THE ORDER OF ENDLESS NIGHT
– A CULT OF CHARDROS
Founded almost three centuries ago in the great
necropolis of Iosaz (the sprawling cemetery lying
on the outskirts of the Lormyrian capital) the
Order of Endless Night dedicate themselves to
serving the unspoken will of Chardros. Their
founder, an ancient Liche, now dwells in Utkel
in the Purple Towns - a canker in the mercantile
heart of the Young Kingdoms – from which the
order’s agents sally forth to spread unrest,
disease and evil throughout the world.
Some 250 years ago one of the order’s most
powerful servants, the Vilmirian sorcerer Toribio
of Sheff, came to Old Hrolmar disguised as a
priest of Vallyn the Wise. Toribio was seeking an
artefact of Chaos, the Masque of F’Haarok Tor,
lost when the Melnibonéan rulers of the district
abandoned their estate after the Dharzi Wars
previous. Toribio’s erudition soon gained him a
place in the duke’s court as tutor to the future
heir, Arvido Astran. Slowly and subtly the
necromancer began to corrupt his young change,
while simultaneously exploiting his trusted
position to aid his quest.
Before his plans could take root, the Yellow
Plague came to Old Hrolmar, throwing the entire
city into turmoil. The revelation of Toribio’s true
nature was one of the only happy outcomes of
those dark times.witnessed. As he prepared to
sacrifice his young charge to a powerful demon
in the ducal fort’s chapel, in return for protection
from the plague, he was discovered by the Grey
Defenders and slain After his death, his body
was hastily buried in an unmarked grave in the
grounds of the fort, his grimoires were burned,
and the whole ghastly story lost, save for a
garbled folktale, still told today in association
with the legend of a ghost that supposably
haunts the ducal fort.
Interestly enough, while a ghost does
indeed haunt the fort’s chapel, it is not that of
Toribio of Sheff, but that of his once-young
charge, who went on to become the horrorhaunted
Duke Arvido Astran. Tainted by
Toribio’s sorceries, Arvido’s soul remained
bound to this plane long after he had cast off the
worst of the necromancer’s twisted tuition.
Toribio’s body, meanwhile, was secretly
exhumed by members of the cult shortly after his
death, and today lies hidden in a secret crypt in
Old Hrolmar’s cemetery, although the exact
location of the grave has long since been
forgotten.
Now the Order of Endless Night have
returned to Old Hrolmar with the intention of
raising Toribio’s shade, so that at long last they
can complete his quest and find the Masque of
F’Haarok Tor. To date, the cultists have been 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 24 -
stymied by their inability to locate the dead
sorcerer’s grave, but once they have discovered
it, they can take the final steps towards
uncovering an artefact that has long since lain
hidden beneath the city.
The members of the order are practitioners
of necromancy (see the Chaosium publication
The Bronze Grimoire for details about
necromantic sorcery and conjurations) and seek
to spread the influence of Chaos through the
reanimation of the dead, and other unsavoury
practices. At present, only one member of the
cult has a permanent presence in the city,
although other members of the order use her
home as a base during their visits to Old
Hrolmar.
LADY SHALLINA OF DHAKOS
With her fine, pale features framed by long
tresses of raven-black hair, the sorceress now
calling herself Lady Shallina presents herself as a
minor Jharkorian noblewoman who has been
drawn to Old Hrolmar by the city’s burgeoning
reputation as a haven for the arts. Her residence
is a small mansion in Hilltown whose garden is
scattered with several fine marble statues. Similar
examples of statuary can be found inside the
mansion, although those within Shallina’s private
chambers more closely resemble funeral
monuments than any sensible works of art.
LADY SHALLINA OF DHAKOS
 HIGH-RANKING MEMBER OF THE ORDER
OF ENDLESS NIGHT, AGE 37
CHAOS 45, BALANCE 2, LAW 17
STR 9, CON 12, SIZ 11, INT 18, POW 19, DEX 15,
APP 14
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 85% 1d4+2+db
Iron Claw 80% 1d4+1+db^
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: None presently bound,
although if need be she can call upon one of the VultureLike
Voi’i’cha (see Gods Of Chaos)
^ Shallina’s Iron Claw, which she wears only on special
occasions, is coated with viper venom (POT 16, takes
effect within 15-60 minutes, induces convulsions then
death through respiratory failure)
SPELLS: Animate Limb (2)*, Animate Skeleton (Varies)*,
Brazier Of Power (4), Buzzard Eyes (1), Raise Zombie
(Varies)*, Soul Of Chardros (1-3), Speak With The Dead
(2)*, Spellbind (8)*, Summon Demon (1), Witch Sight (3)
*See The Bronze Grimoire
SKILLS: Art (Poetry) 85%, Art (Philosophy) 85%, Bargain
75%, Dodge 80%, Evaluate 75%, Hide 70%, Insight 65%,
Natural World 25%, Oratory 65%, Potions 60%, Physik
85%, Scribe 85%, Young Kingdoms 50%
Shallina is a cold, aloof woman who has
made few friends in the city, although thanks to
her breeding and wealth she is a regular visitor
at the soirees held by Lady Atania Almodo;
where she discourses intensely on poetry and
philosophy. Her knowledge of some of the best
Jharkorian poets of the last two centuries is
exceptionally well-developed - so much so that
more than one young fop has laughingly
suggested that it is almost as if she had known
them personally (althought strangely Lady
Shallina does not find this joke amusing).
The truth of the matter is, Lady Shallina
does indeed know several of these dead poets,
having interrogated their shades about their lives
and works. Just because she is a necromancer,
she has explained to other members of her order
on more than one occasion, does not mean that
she cannot be also be cultured.
Prior to leaving the Western Continent
Shallina was known as ‘The Cold One’, and was
instrumental in an outbreak of zombies that
plagued the Shazarian city of Aflitain in 398 YK.
Forced to leave the West after constant
interference by her nemesis, the agent of
Lawknown as Orlan of Aflitain, she is yet not
aware that Orlan has followed her to the city.
Since arriving in Old Hrolmar six months
ago Shallina has remained circumspect and
discrete in her order’s practices, unwilling to risk
discovery until the Masque of F’Haarok Tor has
been recovered. Once that aim has been
achieved, she plans to once again release the
Yellow Plague upon the city, a final vengeance
for the murdered Toribio of Sheff.
THE ORDER OF THE PALE
ORCHID – A CULT OF SLORTAR
This hedonistic Chaos cult was established in
Old Hrolmar centuries ago, but has only recently
increased its activities and influence.
Unwittingly Duke Avan Astran’s reign has
provided the Order of the Pale Orchid with
considerable opportunities and freedoms, and it
is for this reason its leaders subtly assist him
whenever possible (although naturally Avan
would be horrified to learn of such support). 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 25 -
The cult’s rituals are held in a secret
underground location: a crypt dating back to the
days of the Bright Empire, and accessed by a
series of tunnels known only to the initiated. The
crypt’s dank air is thick with incense and its
nitrous walls are draped with tapestries and rich
fabric. An alabaster statue of Slortar, carved by
an unknown Melnibonéan artist, stands in an
alcove at one end of the crypt, pale blossoms
heaped at its feet. This statue is the focus of the
order’s rituals, which frequently include orgies,
human sacrifice and cannibalism. The cult’s
symbol is a rare orchid native to the Forest of
Troos, whose fleshy petals emit a rich, sickly
scent. Members of the order will often carry such
flowers about their person, or at least a stylised
version of the bloom as a ring or pendent.
The members of this cult control much of
Old Hrolmar’s black market, and have
considerable access to drugs, poisons and other
smuggled goods, including enchantments and
bound demons. Its members, who are drawn
from all classes, also strive to spread corruption
by providing the city’s residents with outlets for
their most secretive desires. While most of the
order are more devoted to pleasure than to
outright evil, its leaders pursue the gratification
of their perverse desires with the same zeal with
which they seek to spread the corrupting
influence of Chaos throughout the city.
THE DARK LADY
The secretive leader of the Order of the Pale
Orchid is known to her followers only as ‘the
Dark Lady’ and none but her closest follower
knows her identity or her real name. She is
permanently veiled and never participates in the
cult’s orgies, although she delights in presiding
over them. The Dark Lady, who has led Old
Hrolmar’s Slortar cult for as long as any of its
present members can remember is a powerful
sorceress, and a wily and manipulative leader.
Only one other member of the order, the
spice merchant Pascule Janucho, knows that
Slortar’s high priestess is actually the dowager
Duchess Lennara Astran, Duke Avan’s mother.
Having been initiated into the cult as a child by
a maid, Lennara was a priestess by the age of 15
and by 40 the Order of the Pale Orchid’s
absolute leader. Once a fabled beauty, she is
now a wizened crone - her long hair white, her
skin liver-spotted and her eyesight failing. By
using the spell Liken Person to recapture her lost
beauty, Lennara can still appear young and
beautiful, and she also has access to various
drugs designed to maintain her strength and
stamina.
DUCHESS LENNARA ASTRAN
 CULTIST AND MOTHER, AGE 78
 CHAOS 87, BALANCE 16, LAW 31
STR 9, CON 13, SIZ 11, INT 17, POW 23, DEX 10,
APP 8 (17 after casting liken person).
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: Demon Cloak, 2d10
Armour
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
Weapon Skill Damage
Poisoned Kiss 100% special^
Envenomed Dagger 99% 1d4+2+POT 15
poison
^ When she needs to rid herself of a particularly pesky
enemy, Lennara paints her lips with wax before anointing
them with a fast-acting poison of POT 20. Thereafter she
seduces her opponent, using Liken Person to make
herself appear young and comely once again. Her kiss is
invariable fatal.
SPELLS: All and any spells the gamemaster wishes.
Lennara is a potent sorceress of great skill and dedication
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: As well as the demon
bound into her cloak, an array of other demons serve the
dark ladyto be called upon as the gamemaster deems fit
SKILLS: Art (Dance) 105%, Art (Seduction) 99%,
Disguise 85%, Dodge 65%, Evaluate 70%, Insight 110%,
Listen 69%, Million Spheres 19%, Natural World 55%,
Other Language (Low Melnibonéan) 69%, Potions 100%,
Ride 64%, Scent/Taste 85%, Scribe 55%, Young
Kingdoms 45%
While the Duchess attempted to corrupt her
son into the service of Slortar when he was but a
boy, Lennara soon realised that Avan would
never serve Chaos. Her advice and influence has
nonetheless ensured that Duke Avan is the most
liberal ruler Old Hrolmar has ever known, a fact
Lennara takes advantage of to further the aims of
Chaos. Due to her skilled dissembling most of
the city’s population consider Lennara to be a
frail old lady, who is confused and concerned by
her wayward son’s un-Vilmirian ways. None
suspect that she secretly delights in his
permissive rule.
PASCULE JANUCHO – SPICE
MERCHANT
The air within Pascule Janucho’s shop in the
Grand Bazaar is redolent with the smells of the
many spices he imports and exports, including
those of cinnamon, ginger, cloves and nutmeg. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 26 -
Although he maintains a flourishing trade as a
merchant, Janucho’s real business is in
smuggling. His ships carry a secret cargo of
drugs and diabolic enchantments into Vilmir,
and his crews are among the worst ruffians in
Old Hrolmar. As a merchant Pascuale is at pains
to ensure that his business affairs stay as secret as
possible, and so he employs a middleman to
coordinate much of his illegal trade. Ironically
this man, the villainous and venal Emilio
Sisinner, has his office in the same building as
Old Hrolmar’s harbour-master. It is througha
network of corrupt officials, guards, and sailors,
all recruited by Sisinner, that the importation of
the Order’s contraband continues.
Not all of the men who work for Pascuale
and Sisinner are Slortar cultists; many of them
are just greedy, desperate or weak, although
several of their number are truly evil and delight
in undermining the rule of Law.
This powerful cultist is the only member of
the Order of the Pale Orchid who knows the true
identity of the Dark Lady, as he is being groomed
to be her successor. As a result of spending long
hours indoors or below ground Pascule has
extremely pale skin. His hair is a nondescript
brown and trimmed respectably short, while his
eyes are a cold but vivid blue. Were it not for the
expensive cut and fabric of his garments (to
which the scent of many spices cling), and the
ornate and unusual orchid that he always wears
pinned to his chest, Pascuale would present as a
respectable Vilmirian citizen - he is rarely seen
without his broad-brimmed black hat, and is
never less than formally dressed.
Janucho pays lip-service to Law, and can
often be seen escorting his brood of children and
his plump, slow wife to church. He is one of the
Slortar cult’s most powerful agents. Although he
is neither a sorcerer nor a warrior, his strength
lies in his wealth, his intelligence, and the
criminal network he has created. Power is his
ultimate pleasure, although like the other
members of his Order, he also delights in a
variety of decadent and obscene pastimes.
PASCULE JANUCHO, AGE 43, SPICE
MERCHANT AND SMUGGLER
CHAOS 51, BALANCE 3, LAW 16
STR 13, CON 14, SIZ 15, INT 16, POW 13, DEX 12,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 85% 1d3+db
Dagger 80% 1d4+2+db+1d10
(demon dagger)
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: Two demons, one
bound into his dagger, the other, which acts as a spy,
still in its natural form (see below).
NOTES: At required, pascule can call upon a small army
of thugs, smugglers and other sundry criminals as
bodyguards or assassins. The gamemaster should use the
statistics provided in the HROLMARLIAN DIGEST should
such individuals be required.
SKILLS: Conceal Object 90%, Bargain 75%, Evaluate
81%, Fast Talk 65%, Hide 55%, Dodge 60%, Listen 70%,
Move Quietly 45%, Natural World 75%, Oratory 45%,
Potions 60%, Scent/Taste 103%, Scribe 55%, Underworld
Contacts 91%, Young Kingdoms 38%
PASCULE’S LESSER DEMON DAGGER
This demon is bound into a dagger carved of bone, with
the symbol of Chaos engraved on the blade.
INT 5, POW 8
ABILITY: Demon Weapon, Adds 1d10 Damage
NEED: To Be Polished With Fine Resin Daily
CHARAZZAN, PASCULE’S LESSER DEMON
SPY, DEMON INSECT, LATHARYRN BREED
This diminutive demon has the appearance of an unusual
beetle, its carapace a mottled indigo. Closer examination
reveals that it has an ugly, almost human face. Charazzan
crawls and flies about the city, returning to whisper what
it has seen and heard into its master’s ear.
STR 1, CON 3, SIZ 1, INT 19, POW 10, DEX 6
HIT POINTS: 2 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
ABILITIES: Hear, 85%; Knowledge, 80%; See, 85%;
Wings, Flies At 40 Mph
NEED: Eat Rare Spices Once Per Day
THE SMUGGLERS
A motly selection of individuals make up Pascule
Janucho’s smuggling ring. While all of them are
self-serving, not all are aware that their criminal
activities further the goals of Chaos. Less than
half of them are members of the Order of the
Pale Orchid.
Active members of the smuggling ring
include:
• Emilio Sisinner, Janucho’s right-hand man
and a devoted worshipper of Slortar, he is a
dangerous individual with countless thugs at
his call.
• Horton Fulgenico and Hugeot Blasco, whose
New Hrolmar-based coachline and cartage 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 27 -
company makes up an essential part of the
gang’s distribution network for black market
goods Involved with the smugglers out of
greed alone, Fulgenico is unaware of the
cult’s control overthe gang. His partner
Blasco, conversely, is more than aware of
the cult’s activities and is slowly being
drawn into their inner circle.
• Nicolao Castanon, the shipbuilder, plays an
active, although discrete, role in the gang’s
activities, personally ensuring that certain
ships built in his family’s shipyard contain
the secret compartments required to aid in
their criminal activities. He would be
horrified to learn that he is unwittingly
serving Chaos, although is now too deeply
involved with the smugglers to ever escape
the cult.
• Lokan of Cadsandria, a dissolute and drugaddicted
recruiting agent for the gang, and
amember of the Order.
BARON ZAMORO VADRIGAL
The duchy of Vilmiro, in Vilmir’s south-east, is
dominated by barren hills, hot springs,
dangerous
mines and
silt-choked
rivers. It is
ruled over by
Duke
Nogion
Vadrigal, whose paramount interest is the
fledgling science of Law. His youngest son is the
saturnine Baron Zamoro Vadrigal, one of many
recent arrivals in Old Hrolmar. Ostensibly here
to oversee one of his family’s cotton mills in the
Industrial Quarter, the baron, a secret
worshipper of the Chaos Lord Slortar and a new
member of the Order of the Pale Orchid, has
taken advantage of conditions in Old Hrolmar to
propagate the influence of his vile god.
To all intents and purposes Baron Zamoro
is a law-abiding member of the nobility. He has
cold grey eyes, a thin, tanned face, and wears
his black hair and beard trimmed respectably
short. His eyebrows are thick and heavy, and
meet above his aquiline nose. He dresses
puritanically in black linen trousers, black velvet
jacket, white silk shirts, calf-length black leather
boots, and a broad-brimmed black hat. Only the
cut and quality of the fabric pronounce him a
member of the nobility, although his arrogant
bearing betrays his social class to most
observers.
Behind closed doors another side of the
baron is revealed. He delights in the pursuit of
pleasure, although for him, pleasure is intimately
linked with the suffering of others. A sadist of
refined sensibilities, Baron Zamoro has made it
his aim to surpass the subtle cruelties of
Melniboné. Although he is still well short of this
goal, his personal habits are perverse in the
extreme. His library abounds in treatises and
tomes concerning surgery, torture and body
modification, including an extremely rare
translation of Dr Jest’s Blade & Beauty:
Concerning the Creation & Maintenance of the
Arts of Agony. The baron is also a gourmand, a
connoisseur of Vilmirian wines and sherries, and
a capable sorcerer. Although he resides in
Hilltown, his ceremonies and sorceries are
centred upon his dark mill perched above the
Hrol Falls.
In the 12 months he has lived in Old
Hrolmar, Zamoro has slowly climbed to a
position of some significance in the local cult of
Slortar and he aspires to become the Order’s
high priest, a
position
currently
held by the
mysterious
Dark Lady.
Sadly the baron’s impetuous nature is likely to
doom him to failure long before this goal is
within his grasp.
BARON ZAMORO VADRIGAL
 SORCERER AND SLORTAR CULTIST, AGE 33
CHAOS 37, BALANCE 5, LAW 11
STR 14, CON 12, SIZ 11, INT 15, POW 18, DEX 9,
APP 9 HP 12
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: Leather and Rings
(No Helm) 1d6
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 65% 1d3+db
Broadsword 85% 1d8+db+2d10
(demon
broadsword)
SPELLS: Brazier Of Power (4), Chaos Warp (4), Cloak Of
Cran Liret (1-4), Compulsion (3), Hell’s Armour (4),
Ignorance From Slortar* (3), Pox (1), Rat Vision (1),
Slortar’s Grasp (10), Summon Demon (1), Wisdom Of
“But Chaos, as you no doubt have already learned, has
very little taste – whereas Law, of course, has rather
too much.”
THE REVENGE OF THE ROSE, III, I
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 28 -
Slortar (3), Witch Sight (3) *See The Bronze Grimoire
** See Gods Of Chaos
SKILLS: Art (Dancing) 60%, Art (Torture) 80%, Art (Wine
Appreciation) 70%, Bargain 60%, Disguise 45%, Dodge
60%, Evaluate 65%, Hide 50%, Insight 45%, Natural
World 35%, Oratory 50%, Potions 36%, Scribe 47%,
Young Kingdoms 40%
LESSER DEMON BROADSWORD
A minor demon of the Ratchangett breed, whose need is
to be cleaned with lavender oil after it has spilled blood,
is bound within this blade. An egg-sized uncut ruby
adorns the sword’s pommel.
INT 3, POW 10
ABILITY: Demon Weapon, Adds 2d10 Damage
NEED: Cleaned With Lavender Oil After It Has Spilled
Blood
OTHER SLORTAR CULTISTS
Numerous other members of the Order of the
Pale Orchid dwell in the city. These include:
• Agostion Corunna, an elderly attendant at
the public baths in the Merchant’s Quarter,
who the cult use to dispose of bodies and
other damning evidence in the building’s
furnaces.
• Francisca Fornova, a lascivious barmaid at
The Cardinal’s Nose in the Foreign Quarter.
• Lady Esperanza Domingo, the spoiled
daughter of a minor noble.
• Sergeant Nuno Ontanao, a Grey Defender
from the 4th Battalion, stationed at the East
Gate.
THE FORCES OF GOOD
The Church of Law chains Vilmir in bonds of
obedience, subservience and stasis. Originating
in Lormyr during the rebellion against the Bright
Empire, the worship of the White Lords is the
pre-eminent force throughout the nation. The
ruler of the Church, Cardinal Garrick, rules
Vilmir in all but name, and with the death of
King Naclon in the Sacking of Imyyr in the
winter of 403, his power in Vilmir – and that of
Law – will become absolute.
It has been claimed that humanity worships
Law not through choice, but because it is the
only option to inimical, insane Chaos. At its best
Law is a civilising force under whose aegis art,
culture and technology can flourish, at its worst
it is inflexible and brings only stagnation. But
when tempered with more human mercies and
desires, as evidenced in Old Hrolmar, Law can
be a force for peace.
FOLLOWERS OF ELGIS
Thanks in part to the restraint displayed by the
elderly Chancellor Helforth (who in his prime
was a living example of the tenets of the White
Lord Elgis), Duke Avan has been allowed every
freedom in bringing change to Old Hrolmar -
thus far. Unfortunately, Helforth is not long for
this world, and behind him several powerful
lords of the Church jostle for position, ready to
make their move when the elderly Chancellor’s
pure soul abandons the physical world.
Should Chancellor Helforth die, or be
forced to step down from his position, two main
rivals are poised to vie for control of the Church
of Law in Old Hrolmar.
CHANCELLOR HUMBERTO
HELFORTH
As a child in provincial Belan, the young
Humberto Helforth was blessed with visions of
the White Lords, and was clearly destined for an
important role in the Church. He was also a
mediator and a man of wisdom and compassion,
and it was not long before he rose swiftly
through the brown-robed ranks of the priests of
Elgis to become the head of their order.
Humberto Helforth has now served as the
Chancellor of Elgis the Gentle for almost 50
years. Under his guidance the priesthood of Elgis
have focussed upon missionary work throughout
the Young Kingdoms, seeking to temper the
violence of the world through peace and
understanding. Since Cardinal Garrick’s rise to
power some 20 years ago, however, the
priesthood of Elgis have gradually seen their
influence in Vilmir eroded. Old Hrolmar is their
last stronghold in this part of the world, and it is
no coincidence that several of the most
successful Vilmirian ambassadors to the courts of
Lormyr, Jharkor and Filkhar have been
Hromarlian-born.
Chancellor Helforth is now a frail man with
snow-white hair, but although stooped and
wrinkled, he still radiates an air of calm
compassion. Limited in his mobility by age, he 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 29 -
moves slowly and deliberately, with the
assistance of his devoted body-servants. His
milky eyes, while wandering, are still
occasionally filled with passion, and although
his voice is light, it carries well in the echoing
sanctum of the Temple of Elgis. He has always
been quick to laugh, and has a kind word for all,
although of late he struggles to remember the
names of many of those he talks to. He has also
occasionally been observed engaged in
conversation with himself: losing his mind, his
critics say; communing with the spirit of great
Elgis Himself, his followers declare.
The Chancellor was a valued adviser to
Duke Culvan (Avan’s father), and plays a similar
role for the new duke, whom he loves like a son,
(despite sometimes confusing him with his late
father). Although his mind wanders, Chancellor
Helforth is not yet in his dotage, and may yet
surprise those who believe him lost in the fog of
senility.
CHANCELLOR HUMBERTO HELFORTH
 FRAIL SPIRITUAL LEADER, AGE 79
CHAOS 16, BALANCE 28, LAW 77
STR 7, CON 11, SIZ 9, INT 16, POW 18, DEX 6,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 10 ARMOUR: 1D6+1 (Helforth’s
stiff and rustling robes of brown
velvet and brocade are
enchanted, and act as of armour)
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
Weapon Skill Damage
Light Mace 55% 1d6+2+db
SPELLS: Contribute To Truth* (1), Diminish Demon* (3),
Field Of Law (4), Four-In-One (2-8), Membrane Of Law
(3), Truth Of Love* (3) *See The Bronze Grimoire
SKILLS: Art (Diplomacy) 90%, Doctrine of Law 99%,
Insight 95%, Natural World 40%, Oratory 86%, Other
Language (Low Melnibonean) 65%, Own Language
(Common) 85%, Scribe 77%, Young Kingdoms 82%
CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR VELLON
The Chancellor’s right-hand man is, like his
master, a devoted priest of Elgis, but one who
feels that Duke Avan has gone too far in his
obsession with all that is new and different.
Were he appointed as Chancellor after Helforth’s
death, Chief Administrator Vellon would seek to
halt further change in the city, but, under the
grace of Elgis, would allow for the new
settlements, such as that of New Hrolmar and
Quayside to remain.
Although publicly tight-lipped and stern, in
private the Chief Administrator is deeply
insecure. He eases his fears by dominating those
below him and obsequiously cultivating the
goodwill of his superiors. Vellon’s concerns
about his own abilities are not aided by the
smooth words of his chief assistant, the
inscruitable Administrator Corunna. Vellon is
plump, grey haired, and prone to a hacking
cough in the winter months. His temper is short,
as is his stature, while his nails are bitten down
to the quick. Whenever he is nervous, which is
often enough, he unconsciously plucks loose
threads from his heavy brown robes.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR VELLON
NERVOUS CONSERVATIVE, AGE 55
CHAOS 21, BALANCE 22, LAW 55
STR 13, CON 15, SIZ 8, INT 13, POW 15, DEX 11,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: NONE
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
Weapon Skill Damage
Morningstar Flail 65% 1d10+1+db
Short Sword 50% 1d6+1+db
SKILLS: Doctrine of Law 85%, Fret 99%, Insight 76%,
Natural World 45%, Oratory 60%, Physik 56%, Young
Kingdoms 40%
ADMINISTRATOR CORUNNA
Administrator Vellon’s main rival is the wily
Pethron Corunna, a former ambassador to the
court of Jharkor, where it is said he learned
much in the art ofintrigue. While a devoted
servant of Elgis, Pethron believes that peace can
come only after Law has eliminated opposition
to its rule, or as he puts it, “The flame of
civilisation is kindled upon the pyres of the
slain”.
Corunna is a smooth-voiced, dark eyed and
dapper man normally seen clad in rich brown
robes. He is rarely seen without a roll of
parchment tucked under one arm, from which
he can swiftly pull any quotes or figures
necessary to prove a point or win an argument.
His current postion sees him responsible for
maintaining the day-to-day operations of the
Glass Pyramid, a role he performs with quiet
pride.
Administrator Corunna is well aware that
Humberto Helforth is in his last years, and 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 30 -
hungers for the temporal and spiritual power that
the position of Chancellor would give him.
Should he attain this goal Pethron would closely
ally himself with Cardinal Garrick’s aggressive
rule. He and Duke Avan do not see eye to eye,
and he would delight in reinstating the control of
the Church over the straying citizens on Old
Hrolmar – by force, if necessary.
ADMINISTRATOR CORUNNA
 AMBITIOUS PRIEST, AGE 41
CHAOS 25, BALANCE 19, LAW 50
STR 14, CON 11, SIZ 12, INT 14, POW 16, DEX 12,
APP 14
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: NONE
DAMAGE BONUS: NONE
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 85% 1d4+2+db
Short Sword 81% 1d6+1+db
Heavy Mace 75% 1d8+2+db
SPELLS: Liken Shape (4), Soul Of Chardros (1-4), Witch
Sight (3)
SKILLS: Art (Diplomacy) 77%, Doctrine Of Law 80%, Fast
Talk 85%, Insight 79%, Intrigue 81%, Oratory 66%, Other
Language (Low Melnibonean) 25%, Own Language
(Common) 90%, Young Kingdoms 40%
OTHER NOTABLE PRIESTS
Although the sect of Elgis dominates religious life
in Old Hrolmar, the White Lords have an array
of followers in their service throughout the city.
ADMINISTRATOR UTHOS
The humourless Uthos is one of the red-robed
warrior-priests of Tovik, and is in charge of the
pyramid’s guards and defences. He spends much
of his time training and re-training his meagre
forces in the temple forecourt, leading the
services at the Church of Tovik in Hilltown when
not otherwise engaged.
Uthos is a tall and imposing figure; broadshouldered,
bull-necked and barrel chested, with
piercing blue eyes, a shaven head, and thearrow
of Law tattooed in blue upon his forehead. He is
rarely seen out of his armour, which he wears
underneath his priestly vestments.
Although raised in the Abbey of the
Cleansing Flame in Western Vilmiro, Uthos is
not strictly speaking a member of the Inquisition,
although many believe otherwise (an illusion he
is at pains not to shatter). He is strongly opposed
to the duke’s permissive rule, and would be swift
to throw his weight behind any organised
opposition to Avan Astran. Conversely, he
despises Chief Administrator Vellon, a man
whom he rightly judges as lacking the
confidence of command.
ADMINISTRATOR UTHOS
DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, AGE 45
CHAOS 30, BALANCE 15, LAW 62
STR 17, CON 16, SIZ 16, INT 13, POW 15, DEX 13,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: Young Kingdoms
Plate (Helm On) 1d10+2
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Great Sword 99% 2d8+2+db
Great Hammer 85% 1d10+3+db
Broadsword 79% 1d8+1+db
Brawl 88% 1d3+db
SKILLS: Doctrine Of Law 55%, Dodge 70%, Listen 75%,
Military History 88%, Move Quietly 65%, Own Language
(Common) 65%, Ride 75%, Scribe 35%, Warfare 86%,
Young Kingdoms 45%
CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR HUGO
SATIGO
The close-lipped Administrator Satigo is Old
Hrolmar’s chief judge, and the highest-ranked
priest of Donblas in the duchy. His greatest
passions are for justice, good red wines (in
moderation) and the freedom from Chaos that isLaw’s
gift to humanity. Hugo is athletic and
intellectual, softly spoken and good humoured.
He has dark brown eyes, thick blonde hair, and
is invariably clad in the silver robes of his office.
Having displeased Cardinal Garrick by his
adherence to the spirit of his god’s teachings, as
opposed to the rather strict letter of Vilmirian
civil and religious law, Hugo was posted to Old
Hrolmar 10 years ago. In theory this was to
banish him from the capital and minimise his
progressive influence, but instead he has been
able to work alongside Chancellor Helforth and
Duke Avan, ensuring that Hrolmar’s citizens are
more content than those of any other Vilmirian
duchy.
Satigo’s carefully worded reports to
Cardinal Garrick have underplayed the social
and physical changes that have swept through
Old Hrolmar, but he fears that Garrick will soon 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 31 -
move against the Duke, especially now that the
city’s vibrant reputation has spread throughout
the Young Kingdoms.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR HUGO SATIGO
PROGRESSIVE PRIEST, AGE 48
CHAOS 21, BALANCE 29, LAW 60
STR 13, CON 14, SIZ 15, INT 15, POW 17, DEX 11,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 89% 1d8+1+db
Battleaxe 80% 1d8+2+db
Dagger 90% 1d4+2+db
SPELLS: Contribute To Truth* (1)* See The Bronze
Grimoire
SKILLS: Doctrine Of Law 89%, Insight 81%, Oratory
70%, Other Language (Low Melnibonean) 15%, Own
Language (Common) 85%, Scent/Taste 78%, Scribe 91%,
Young Kingdoms 50%
THE INQUISITION
From its headquarters in the bleak uplands of
Vilmiro, the Order of the Cleansing Flame (as the
Inquisition is formally known) dispatches agents
the length and breadth of Vilmir (and sometimes
even into neighbouring Ilmiora and beyond) to
rooting out heresy wherever it grows, by
whatever means necessary.
Although not officially recognised by the
Church of Law, Vilmir’s religious leader Cardinal
Garrick has long turned a blind eye to the
actions of these fanatical worshippers of
Donblas. By contrast, Duke Avan has made it
publicly known that he will not tolerate the
actions of vigilantes in his city, and that any
action taken by the Inquisition that falls outside
the law - even if it is made in order to strengthen
the rule of Law on earth - will be punished by all
and any means at his disposal.
DAMION CLAVAR
The current leader of the Inquisition in Old
Hrolmar has dwelt in the city for less than a year,
having been sent by his order to monitor the
spread of various heresies that go as yet
unchecked by church and state, and to decide
how best to combat them. His predecessor was
recalled to the Abbey of the Cleansing Flame for
re-education, having failed to stamp out the
duke’s licentious and suspect ways.
With his cold grey eyes, short-cropped irongrey
hair, and stern, square face, Damion Clavar
appears no more than a staid, unimaginative
architect. Indeed those that know him believe
that he is nothing more than a man whose small
firm clings blindly to the old ways, and whose
business has overlooked the many opportunities
for innovative architecture currently in vogue in
Old Hrolmar. In truth Clavar is the city’s most
powerful Inquisitor, and although he has not yet
acted upon his survey of the city, he is disgusted
by the lechery, debauchery and general heresy
he sees spreading throughout Old Hrolmar. Its
source is clearly the adventurer-explorer Avan
Astran, who has abandoned his duty to the
White Lords in favour of satiating his various
appetites for sensation and pleasure. For now
Clavar prays to Donblas that the duke will see
the error of his ways. If he does not, then not
even the duke’s peerage will protect Avan from
the Inquisition’s righteous justice.
Such is the Inquisition’s power that, should
he demand it, Clavar can access almost all of the
resources of the Church of Law in Old Hrolmar.
His chief contact at the temple is Administrator
Uthos, although he has yet to make himself
known to the man.
DAMION CLAVAR
 ARCHITECT AND HIGH INQUISITOR, AGE 33
CHAOS 35, BALANCE 11, LAW 89
STR 18, CON 16, SIZ 16, INT 15, POW 17, DEX 14,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: Young Kingdoms
Plate (Helm On) 1d10+2
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 148% 1d8+1+db
Short Sword 165% 1d6+1+db
SKILLS: Art (Architecture) 85%, Art (Torture) 95%,
Doctrine Of Law 84%, Dodge 120%, Insight 85%, Jump
80%, Move Quietly 70%, Oratory 75%, Phsyik 60%, Ride
85%, Track 60%, Young Kingdoms 60%
FOLLOWERS OF OTHER GODS
A number of independent devotees of Chaos,
Law and the Balance dwell within Old Hrolmar.
Besides these individuals (whose plots and
schemes can easily be entwined with or opposed 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 32 -
to the adventurers’ own activities) several
organisations of note may also be of interest, and
may serve as allies or foils to the adventurers.
The Gamemaster is invited to make use of these
organisations and their members as he or she
sees fit.
Many adherents of Chaos, outside those
previous described, are active in Old Hrolmar,
each looking to exploit the rapid and seemingly
uncontrolled changes that are occurring in the
city. These include:
• Rostik of Lashmar, a murderously insane
agent of Hionhurn living in the Foreign
Quarter.
• The Pan Tangian spy, Astik of Nargesser,
who lives on Scribe Street in the Merchants’
Quarter.
• Another Pan Tangian, the mercenary and
brothel guard Verkij Vl’al, a New Hrolmar
resident.
The only Lawful operative of note currently
residing in the city is the vengeance-driven
Mistress Orlan of Aflitain, who for the present is
sequestered at the Scales of Goldar Inn in
Quayside.
A handful of people in Old Hrolmar serve
neither Law nor Chaos. These include:
• Madame Jemma Monferriz, a servant of the
Cosmic Balance dwelling on Future-MadePlain
Street.
• New Hrolmar’s blacksmith and devotee of
Kakatal, the Ilmioran-born Pietro of Ilmar.
• The spirit-worshipping Weeping Waste
warrior Ulf Eel.
INFLUENTIAL FOREIGNERS
Duke Avan has actively encouraged some of the
best and brightest minds in the Young Kingdoms
to settle in Old Hrolmar. Philosophers and poets
have flocked to the once-provincial capital and
contributed to its transformation into a truly
cosmopolitan city. Some such foreigners have
become leading citizens in a short space of time;
some have gained prestige through their mastery
of the arts; others have the duke’s ear or provide
him with valued advice.
An uneasy truce exists between the later
individuals and certain members of Old
Hrolmar’s nobility, who cannot but help view
the new arrivals as upstarts and intruders even as
they recognise their value as allies against Count
Rodrigo Astran and his faction.
Prominent foreigners currently living in Old
Hrolmar include:
• Hoset the Younger, an elderly Argimilian
philosopher from the University of
Cadsandria who was personally invited by
the duke to oversee the Collegium now
being built in the Merchants’ Quarter.
• Lady Yolanda Karadan, the famous
Jharkorian astrologer, whose wise counsel
stems from her unswerving belief in the
accuracy of her predictions.
• Master Karlo Condotta, a temperamental
Ilmioran artist whose frescoes, paintings and
sculptures are renowned for their vibrancy
and detail.
• Taan-Seron, a Myyrrhn adventurer whose
aerial displays above Old Hrolmar’s fanciful
rooftops provoke gasps of awe on an almost
daily basis: it is said that no one else in the
world has explored the Western Continent
so thoroughly as he.
Details about other foreign residents of Old
Hrolmar, including the Tarkeshite dreamer Kal
Baldan, the murderous Rostik of Lashmar, and
the healer Jozel of Cadsandria, appear elsewhere
in this volume.
THE INTERNATIONAL WORKERS’
CLUB
This international order of libertarians attracts
anarchists, free thinkers and revolutionaries to its
ranks, and agitates for new political and social
freedoms throughout the Young Kingdoms.
Although their influence is strongest in the
Southern Continent, in Old Hrolmar they are
presently restricted to educational and charitybased
activities.
In some parts of Vilmir, educating the
working classes is tantamount to heresy, and so
the International Workers’ Club strives to ensure
that their work receives no publicity or public
commentary. Indeed in Lormyr the IWC is
outlawed, due to its role in fermenting civil
unrest and open rebellion against the existing
social order: its members have been involved in 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 33 -
attempted
assassinatio
ns, public
protests and
other seditious activities. At present their main
aim is to build a support base in Old
Hrolmar.Once they have cultivated a larger and
more loyal membership, they will embark on the
next stage of their plan, to liberate the workers of
Vilmir by any means necessary.
The IWC’s members are tied to no
particular religion, although the bulk of its
members will claim devotion to the principles of
the Cosmic Balance if pressed. They have no
hierarchy and no leaders, working by consensus
to establish all goals and objectives.
VASILII KRASNORADA
REVOLUTIONARY, AGE 47
The most influential member of the International Worker’s
Club in Old Hrolmar is the middle-aged Lormyrian Vasilii
Krasnorada, who hails originally from the snowy steppes
of the country’s south. He has dark, burning eyes, a long
grey beard and a deep and resonant voice.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Insight 96%, Oratory 105%, Scribe
65%, Young Kingdoms 71%
THE MEREGHN
This secretive order of assassins has its
headquarters in Bakshaan and maintains
outposts across the civilised world. Originally a
tool of the senators of Bakshaan, the Mereghn
(who take their name from the Melnibonéan
word for information) gained their independence
once they discovered that they could use their
abilities against their former employers. Today
they are an international network of assassins
and spies, whose skills and talents are available
to the highest bidder. Although disciplined and
professional, the order’s members are not
fanatical, and they value loyalty. Anyone can
hire the Mereghn and their fees are always
negotiable.
The traditional means of contacting the
Mereghn has been to leave a note for them at the
local shrine of Mirath, although owing to recent
events, in Old Hrolmar that is no longer
possible. As the result of a number of
unsuccessful attempts upon his life, Duke Avan
has vowed to stamp out the Mereghn in his city,
and so for the time being a new drop-point has
been established - at the obelisk in the city’s
cemetery that
commemorate
s the victims
of the Yellow
Plague.
Statistics for a typical Mereghn assassin can
be found in the HROLMARLIAN DIGEST of this
book.
BALTAZAR GONCALO
This young, lithe, panther-like Hrolmarlian is the
newly appointed and presently uncontested
leader of the Mereghn in Old Hrolmar (following
the recent death of his predecessor, Ynigo
Salazar (also known as Salazar the Shadow) in a
final, unsuccessful attempt on Duke Avan’s life.
His first (and most important) act as leader
was to cancel the contract on Avan’s life, an
action that has probably saved the Mereghn from
being driven out of the city. Baltazar is currently
attempting to negotiate a truce between the
assassins’ guild and the Duke, although to date
all of his overtures have been rejected.
Baltazar is wise beyond his years, as well as
being dangerously efficient at his job. Born to a
working class family in the Industrial Quarter, he
set his sights on joining the Mereghn at an early
age, seeing the assassin’s guild as one of his only
means of escaping his lowly origins. He is a
devoted worshipper of Mirath of Law, and in his
heart believes himself to be doing Her work,
killing those whom She has appointed must die.
BALTAZAR GONCALO
MEREGHN LEADER, AGE 21
CHAOS 27, BALANCE 13, LAW 31
STR 14, CON 12, SIZ 14, INT 15, POW 16, DEX 18,
APP 16
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: Soft Leather Plate
(Helm On) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 115% 1d4+2+db+poison
Thrown Dagger 90% 1d4+2+db+poison
Strangle Cord 85% Suffocation (as per
drowning)
Shortsword 95% 1D6+1+db
SPELLS: Bonds Unbreakable (3), Hell’s Armour (1-4),
Midnight (1), Moonrise (1), Rat Vision (1), Speed Of
Vezhan (1-3), Sureness Of Cran Liret (1-4), Tread Of Cran
Liret (1-4)
SKILLS: Hide 95%, Listen 90%, Move Quietly 115%,
Potions 85%
‘…assassins were expensive in Old Hrolmar…’
THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 34 -
T
THE GAZETTEER
HIS CHAPTER DETAILS MANY important
or infamous locations found within the
towering stone walls of Old Hrolmar, and
some that lie outside the city proper. In addition,
the individuals who frequent these locales are
described in depth, providing the Gamemaster
with their motives, goals, and other personality
traits.
Many of
these entries
will suggest
possible
adventures to the imaginative Gamemaster,
while others are more prosaic, beingonly of
importance in their relevance to the adventurers'
daily lives and the degree of verisimilitude they
add to the campaign.
Note that statistics for the multitudinous
numbers of commoners, guards and lesser lights
who call the city home can be found in the
HROLMARLIAN DIGEST.
DISTINCTIVE LAND MARKS
Although Old Hrolmar consists of several
separate districts, not every important city
feature is unique to one specific location. Here
are described those landmarks which cross
various districts’ borders.
THE GATES OF OLD HROLMAR
There are three main entrances to Old Hrolmar,
in the north, south and east walls of the city,
each protected by a fortified guardhouse - the
Southern or Harbour Gate being the largest and
most heavily fortified due to its defensive
position overlooking the harbour. These solid,
square, three-storey guardhouses have been
constructed on either side of all three of Old
Hrolmar’s gates, and are garrisioned by the ever
watchful Grey Defenders. The city’s sandstone
walls, rising
up from
foundations
set deep into
the bedrock,
are 30 feet
high and 10 feet thick, ensuring the safety of the
citizens. Individually, each tower stands 40 feet
high, with a considerable drop from the parapets
to the ground below. On the first floors are found
the windowless guardrooms, manned by troops
who inspect and regulate the daily flow of traffic
through the gates. ; Internal stairs lead to the
second floor above, where the guards’ residential
quarters (in one tower) and the machinery which
operates the portcullises (heavy grills which can
be dropped down over the gates as an additional
line of defence. A complex series of pulleys,
weights and levers exists to raise each portcullis,
although it can be dropped in a moment by a
quick-witted guard) are found. A corridor that
crosses above the gate connects the two towers
at this level. Its floor is pierced with murder
holes through which molten lead can be poured
or arrows fired open down at attackers in the
gate tunnel. . The third floor of each tower is
given over to the garrison’s messes and
armouries. Doors at this level lead out onto the
walkway atop the city walls, while further stairs
lead up to the rooftop, where watchful guards
are stationed 24 hours a day.
Elric smiled and looked up beyond Old Hrolmar’s
baroque skyline at the stars.
THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 35 -
The gates, made of heavy oaken timbers
bound with iron, are closed and barred half an
hour after every sunset, and remain closed,
except for the duke and his most trusted
emissaries, until half an hour after dawn the
following day. Trumpets are sounded from each
tower to mark the rising and the setting of the
sun, and to signal the gates’ impending opening
and closure.
Some 40 men, each led by their own
captain, garrison each of Old Hrolmar’s three
gates, although the North Gate (also called the
Jadmar Gate, as it marks the road to the capital)
is often more heavily manned due to its
proximity to the lawless Foreign Quarter.
Upon entering the city, all visitors must
hand over any weapons larger than a club or a
dagger to the safe keeping of the Grey
Defenders. In return, they are issued with a small
wooden chit as a receipt for the weapon(s),
which can only be redeemed upon departure.
Only members of the Vilmirian nobility are
allowed to carry swords openly inside the city
walls, although with a successful Charisma roll,
the authorities can sometimes be convinced to
extend this law to visiting foreign nobles.
EAST GATE
40 men from the 4th Battalion guard the East
Gate. Stationed here around the clock on
rotating shifts, they are under the command of
40-year-old Captain Franchist Fernando, the
illegitimate son of Count Rodrigo Astran. He is
overweight, red-faced, and overly fond of wine.
As a result he is often found sleeping at his desk
rather than at his post, especially in the long
dusty afternoons of summer.
CAPTAIN FRANCHIST
 GREY DEFENDER, AGE 40
Captain Fernando’s reputation is not held in high regard,
the result of more than once being accused of accepting
to bribes. While the men of the East Gate vary from
ruffians in uniform to poor soldiers aspiring to their best,
they struggle under the captain’s lax command (although
for one of them, Nuno Ontanao, a secret Slortar cultist,
this allows him freedoms that would be impossible at
other gates).
Like his father, Captain Franchist despises Avan Astran,
and would stop at nothing to see him ousted from the
ducal throne. Although he claims to despise the
decadence of the duke reign, the captain’s ire is more
personal than political. Franchist is sure that if his father,
the count, was duke, he would be awarded a more
important position within the city, despite his illegitimate
birth.
CHAOS 15, BALANCE 03, LAW 29
STR 13, CON 16, SIZ 12, INT 12, POW 13, DEX 16,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 101% 1d6+1+db
Broadsword 98% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 70% 1d4+2+db
Hunting Bow 75% 1d6+1+1/2db
Cavalry Lance 105% 1d8+1+db (+horse
db when charging)
Kite Shield 85% 1d4+db+kb
SKILLS: Bargain 75%, Dodge 80%, Insight 71%, Lead
Troops 68%, Oratory 60%, Ride 95%, Search 67%, Track
40%, Young Kingdoms 33%
NORTH GATE
A company of 50 Grey Defenders from the
2nd Battalion guards the North Gate (sometimes
called the Jadmar Gate). They are led by the
inbred, almost-chinless Captain Artimio
Guerrero, a minor Vilmirian noble. Guerrero is a
tall, thin man with light brown hair, brown eyes,
and cruel, thin lips. Both his moustachios and his
beard are waxed. An old-fashioned Old
Hrolmalrian, Guerrero considers the liberal
changes introduced since Duke Avan took the
throne a sign of decadence, and one that does
nothing but encourage the arrival of despised
foreigners. He is always perfectly turned out,
with his armour burnished to a mirror-like sheen.
CAPTAIN ARTIMIO GUERRERO
 GREY DEFENDER, AGE 34
Captain Artimio has his work cut out for him monitoring
the flow of foreigners through the Jadmar Gate, but he
has trained his men to record the movements and details
of anyone they consider suspicious - their constant
interrogation, in some cases, borders on harassment. The
captain’s current obsession is to shut down The Gift of
Goldar tavern, a known gambling den run by a Filkharian
immigrant.
CHAOS 12, BALANCE 5, LAW 23
STR 13, CON 14, SIZ 13, INT 13, POW 16, DEX 14,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 105% 1d6+1+db
Broadsword 98% 1d8+1+db
Javelin 95% 1D6+1/2db
Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
Hunting Bow 85% 1d6+1+1/2db 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 36 -
Cavalry Lance 90% 1d8+1+db (+horse
db when charging)
Kite Shield 90% 1d4+db+kb
SKILLS: Bargain 55%, Dodge 70%, Insight 87%, Lead
Troops 75%, Oratory 66%, Ride 75%, Search 87%, Track
45%, Young Kingdoms 30%
SOUTH GATE
 The Captain of the South Gate (also known as
the Port or Harbour Gate) is the dashing Toemas
Satigo, tall, tanned and strong-jawed. He wears
the grey tabard of the city guard over his brightly
burnished armour. Captain Satigo is a close
friend of Old Hrolmar’s Harbour-Master, Amliss
Arrago, both of whom could become potentially
valuable allies of the adventurers. 40 men of the
3rd Battalion guard the South Gate under the
captain’s command.
CAPTAIN TOEMAS SATIGO
GREY DEFENDER, AGE 28
CHAOS 19, BALANCE 14, LAW 28
STR 15, CON 14, SIZ 13, INT 15, POW 15, DEX 14,
APP 15
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 115% 1d6+1+db
Broadsword 108% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 78% 1d4+2+db
Hunting Bow 80% 1d6+1+1/2db
Cavalry Lance 93% 1d8+1+db (+horse
db when charging)
Kite Shield 95% 1d4+db+kb
SPELLS: Hell’s Armour (1-4), Suppleness of Xiombarg
(3)
SKILLS: Bargain 65%, Dodge 60%, Insight 90%, Lead
Troops 80%, Oratory 72%, Ride 78%, Search 85%, Track
45%, Young Kingdoms 38%
RIVER GATES
Low stone arches blocked by heavy bars
mark the points where the River Hrol enters and
exits the city. These gates cannot be opened, and
as a result are not guarded from within. The bars
descend into the sandy riverbed, theoretically
prohibiting unwelcome visitors from gaining
access to the city.
THE MIGHTY HROL RIVER
From its crystal clear headwaters in the northeast
of Hrolmar, the Hrol, its broad waters too
shallow for all but the small boats to navigate,
winds sinuously across the plains and fields of
the duchy to the sea. Upon entering Old
Hrolmar the river is quickly polluted by the
effluent produced by the numerous tanneries,
dyehouses and mills that line the riverbanks.
Such businesses are most thickly clustered above
the Hrol Falls, and as a result the waters below
the falls are no longer drinkable.
Three bridges span the river, at Fort Street,
Park Street and Fall Street (which, true to its
name, crosses the river just above the Hrol Falls).
The Park Street Bridge is the widest, and spans
the river in three stone arches; the Fall Street
Bridge is the most crowded, and made of wood;
while the Fort Street Bridge, which is a single
arch of stone, is the best guarded.
ROADS WITH AND AROUND
THE CITY
All of Old Hrolmar’s main roads are cobbled and
well tended, while its side streets and laneways
are unpaved, and dusty in summer, and muddy
in winter. All are universally littered with animal
droppings and common refuse, and although
several areas of the city are largely free from
human waste, thanks to the sewer system,
adventurers will still be affronted with odours
everywhere they turn. There are no sidewalks in
the city, and doors open directly onto the street.
Only the main streets have gutters, which run
down their centre and form a hazard for the
unwary visitor. For the most part the streets are
only cleaned when it rains, although some
merchants employ urchins to sweep the cobbles
outside their premises, for the convenience of
their richer clients.
The major roads such as Valario Street,
Jadmar Street and Fort Street are approximately
30 feet wide and considerably straighter than
any of the side streets. Some of the smaller
streets and alleyways, such as Cut-throat’s Lane
in an area of the Foreign Quarter known as ‘The
Narrows’ are no more than seven feet wide, and
impassible to anything other than foot traffic. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 37 -
Most movement through the city is done on
foot, save for the occasional horse ridden by a
noble; one of the King’s mounted Messengers in
their bright livery; a rich man’s carriage forced to
inch its way through the crowds; or a heavily
laden donkey or mule led by a sweating
merchant. Here and there squawking chickens
flap out from under a pedestrian’s feet, while
stray cats and wandering dogs freely roam the
streets. Unsurprisingly, by day the streets of Old
Hrolmar teem with crowds, while at night they
are virtually deserted.
Outside the city the King’s Roads run
straight as a die, patrolled at regular intervals by
representitives of the Vilmirian legions, and
maintained by slavegangs. Milestones stand at
regular intervals, displaying the distance to
Jadmar.
CITY DISTRICTS
Old Hrolmar consists of six key districts. These
are described individually below, as are
important locations and individuals within each
area.
FOREIGN QUARTER
The lawless Foreign Quarter is known to its
residents as the Shadow City, and is the home of
Old Hrolmar’s underworld. Clustered inside the
city walls around the North Gate, this district is
little more than few blocks of crumbling houses
and labyrinthine alleys, which seem permanently
awash with filth and refuse. A diverse range of
inhabitants resides in this crowded district, from
the most vicious and dangerous of Old
Hrolmar’s criminals (including cutthroats,
pickpockets,
and prostitutes)
to artists, poets
and, of course,
many of the
foreigners who
now call the city
home. At its
dark heart
stands the building known to some as the Rat’s
Castle. Once a monastery dedicated to Theril of
Law, it is now a debased and detestable ruin
where the beggars of Old Hrolmar hold their
court.
The Foreign Quarter’s side streets are
narrow and its houses are decayed and
verminous, although, among the ramshackle and
crowded tenement buildings can be found the
occasional oasis serving fine foreign food and
wine, where strange songs are sung, and
foreigners eye Vilmirian patrons with suspicion.
The Jharkorian restaurant The White Leopard is
one such establishment; the Lormyrian tavern
The Champion’s Arms another.
While the buildings on the outskirts of the
Foreign Quarter are less villainous than some,
those towards its centre are thieves’ rookeries
and dens of depravity: brothels patronised by the
dissolute, and inns whose sawdust-lined floors
are stained with blood nightly. Many of the
district’s oldest houses were once grand but
almost all have long since fallen into semi-ruin,
where it is not uncommon for entire families to
dwell in a single room. Some streets in the
district are so narrow that one must turn
sideways to squeeze between the buildings,
while secret passageways and boltholes are
common features among many of its business
premises.
Should visitors venture off the main streets
of the Foreign Quarter, they are likely to return
without their purses and other valuables, if
indeed they return at all. Although the Grey
Defenders regularly sweep through the slums
and tenaments of the Foreign Quarter, five more
rascals spring up for every ruffian they arrest.
Rents are cheap, and so are lives here.
BOLTHOLES
Used by the district’s criminals to move about
unseen, and to escape the city watch in the
event of a raid, a secret network of trapdoors,
secret
passages
and escape
routes
connects
many of
the
buildings
in the heart
of the Foreign Quarter. The ways in which
people can travel are as varied as the reasons
they are used, from low tunnels linking cellar
“I had made my swords available to an old merchant,
a stranger to the city. I was to escort him about the
murkier regions of Old Hrolmar in return for a good
purse of gold (better, I think, than he expected to give
me).”
MOONGLUM TO ELRIC, THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 38 -
walls - through which practised locals can
scuttle at a moment’s notice - fences containing
easily removed sections to facilitate a quick exit,
and a network of rear lanes and alleys providing
a baffling maze for pursuers. Several such
boltholes open onto the ancient sewers beneath
the city, by which those familiar with the routes
can cross the entire city without once being seen
above ground.
THE CARDINAL’S NOSE
Although closed some months ago by the
authorities, this tavern has recently reopened in
a new location. Its sign is a caricature of
Cardinal Garrick, his nose red from drink. The
regular patrons are a rowdy mob, as fond of a
brawl as they are a drink, and on most nights
blood is spilt here as regularly as the watereddown
claret that is served over the bar. The bar
staff are surly and the owner, Carlo Bernada, is
stingy. Francisca Fornova, a slatternly and
lascivious devotee of the Chaos Lord Slortar,
works behind the bar, although none of her
colleagues are aware of her allegiance.
The Cardinal’s Nose does not cater for
overnight guests, a fact which has probably
saved more than one hapless visitor from having
their throat cut as they slept. There is no cook,
and the only food provided is simple fare of
breads, cheeses, dried fruit and meats.
If the adventures are looking for the services
of a thief or a murderer, they will find several
drinking here, although inquisitive strangers are
not usually well received by the bar’s ragged
clientele. The Cardinal’s Nose is also the
favoured watering hole for the Foreign Quarter’s
dominant gang, the Bravos, a cold-blooded
group of cutthroats who specialise in
intimidating local shopkeepers and streetwalkers.
DIEGO NAIRON
GANG LEADER, AGE 28
This swaggering lout is a thoroughly nasty piece of work.
Thanks to an old knife wound he is blind in his left eye,
and the scar, which runs down that cheek, twists his lip
in a permanent sneer. A close-cut black beard frames his
face, although he keeps his upper lip shaved. He is
solidly built, heavy-handed, and through a combination
of force of guile, cunning and sheer brutality, has taken
charge of the Bravos after the mysterious death of the
gang’s former leader. Among his more charming habits
are a fondness for beating the prostitutes working the
Foreign Quarter’s streets until they hand over their
earnings, or service him, or both; and a ready willingness
to start a brawl at the flash of a silver coin. Although
Diego and his cronies are unwelcome regulars at The
Cardinal’s Nose, Carlo Bernada, the owner, is too scared
to bar them.
CHAOS 43, BALANCE 08, LAW 11
STR 17, CON 15, SIZ 16, INT 11, POW 14, DEX 16,
APP 7
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: Soft Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 85% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 110% 1d3+db
Large Club 85% 1d8+db
Wrestle 90% special
SPELLS: Hell’s Razor (1-4), Hell’s Talons (1-4)
SKILLS: Climb 65%, Dodge 75%, Fast Talk 65%, Hide
80%, Insight 75%, Listen 90%, Move Quietly 85%,
Swagger 100%
MARCO FORTES
SIMPLE-MINDED THUG, AGE 26
Marco is the most dangerous member of the Bravos, due
to the lethal combination of his stunted intellect and
short temper. He is easily confused and frightened, and
lashes out with his fists whenever threatened. His moonface
is surprisingly innocent, an impression furthered by
his wide brown eyes and his inability to grow a beard. He
is prone to drooling, and his clothes are invariably filthy
and torn. When the rest of the gang are not making
sport of Marco, they tend to use him as bait for their next
victim. Given the opportunity, Marco is just as happy
chasing butterflies or picking flowers as hurting people,
although the Bravos usually keep him busy with the
latter.
CHAOS 32, BALANCE 19, LAW 10
STR 19, CON 17, SIZ 18, INT 5, POW 9, DEX 10,
APP 8
HIT POINTS: 18 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 90% 1d3+db
Large Club 75% 1d8+db
Wrestle 120% special
SKILLS: Admire Pretty Things 100%, Climb 50%, Dodge
55%, Listen 60%, Move Quietly 35%
RAMIGO ESTEVAL
 SADIST, AGE 28
Thin, dark and cold-eyed Ramigo is a gleeful sadist, and
the most evil member of the Bravos. He keeps his hair
and beard trimmed short, framing his saturnine features.
More than any other member of the gang he delights in
hurting his victims in whatever manner will most degrade
them. He is restless, quick-witted, and has an unhealthy
fascination with knives.
CHAOS 57, BALANCE 5, LAW 12
STR 15, CON 14, SIZ 12, INT 17, POW 16, DEX 15,
APP 13
 HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: Soft Leather
(No Helm) 1d6-1 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 39 -
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 70% 1d3+db
Dagger 90% 1d4+2+db
Hand Sickle 85% 1d6+1+db
Throwing Dagger 90% 1d4+1/2db
SPELLS: Bonds Unbreakable (3), Hell’s Sharp Flame (1-
4), Muddle (1), Witch Sight (3)
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: None, although he
lusts for the power a demon weapon would bring him.
SKILLS: Climb 85%, Dodge 95%, Fast Talk 75%,
Hide 85%, Insight 65%, Listen 70%, Menacing
Glare 85%, Move Quietly 85%, Swagger 80%
THE CHAMPION’S ARMS
This tavern is owned by a large Lormyrian
family, led by the burly, long-bearded Aedan of
Stagasaz and his buxom wife Ethelryth. Here,
mead and cider in foaming tankards, and
traditional Lormyrian foods such as fish stew and
pottage, are served over the square, central bar
to the Lormyrian residents and travellers who
patronise the tavern. The tavern’s sign depicts
Earl Aubec, the Champion of Humanity, while its
walls are painted with frescoes depicting
Lormyr’s broad rivers and peaceful lands. The
Champion’s Arms does not provide
accommodation.
THE INTERNATIONAL WORKERS’
CLUB
This fraternal organisation, whose public face is
that of an educational charity, is located in a
well-maintained building on Jadmar Road.
Literacy classes for working men and women are
held here several days a week, and members are
also given access to the club’s small library.
Unknown to most, the International
Workers’ Club is actually a radical organisation
of libertarians, dedicated to educating the
workers of the world and liberating them from
feudal oppression. Its members are viewed as
radicals and troublemakers, and the organisation
itself has been outlawed in Lormyr, Filkhar and
Argimiliar. More details about The International
Workers’ Club and its members are provided in
PLOTS AND POWERS.
MADAME SHARA’S BOARDING
HOUSE
A toothless, ingratiating woman aged somewhere
between 50 and death, Madam Shara is the
owner and landlady of a three-storey tenement
building that has definitely seen better days. The
upper floors suffer a leaking roof, the lower
floors are prone to damp, and rats are the
constant companions of those unfortunate
enough to live here.
A single room in this establishment costs 8
bronze coins a week, which includes two meals
a day. Rooms come furnished, if a thin mattress
stuffed with mouldy straw and a chamber pot
can be called furniture. Breakfast is usually a
thin gruel, dinner a watery stew containing
unrecognisable and unpalatable vegetables
along with the rare chunk of meat. Wise
residents will not leave valuables in their room
here, as such items are prone to disappearing the
moment a person’s back is turned.
Few visitors stay long in this establishment,
some boarders having been known to move out
overnight, or so their venal landlady claims. Few
know that Madame Shara is actually in league
with the Bravos, a group of thugs who think
nothing of slitting a boarder’s throat while he or
she sleeps and splitting the loot with the
landlady. See The Cardinal’s Nose above for
more details on this gang.
KAL BALDAN
 DREAMING ARTIST, AGE 30
Kal Baldan, a starving Tarkeshite artist, is one of Madam
Shara’s current boarders. Although impoverished, if
forced to chose between buying food or art supplies, he
inevitably purchases the pigments he needs for his art, or
the occasional pipe of opium to help stave off hunger
pangs. As a result, the already sickly Baldan is slowly
starving to death. His dark face is drawn, his eyes
hollow, and his heavy brocade robes hang loosely from
his body. Although he is vunerable, as a result of his lack
of finances, his villainous landlady has so far left him in
peace.
Baldan paints scenes from his opium-inspired dreams
upon whatever surfaces are available to him, although he
has thus far spared the peeling walls of his garret
apartment from his art. His room is stacked with the
canvases and the wooden panels he usually paints upon,
depicting baroque and fantastical landscapes unlike
anywhere in the Young Kingdoms. It should become no
surprise to learn that Baldan is a powerful dreamer, and
he has unknowingly explored three of the seven lands of
dreams: Sadanor (the Land of Dreams in Common),
Marador (the Land of Old Desires) and Paranor (the Land
of Lost Beliefs) described in Moorcock’s The Fortress of
the Pearl.
In the right hands Baldan’s paintings could be used as
gates to enter the Lands of Dream, although it is
probable that the artist will be dead long before the
properties of his paintings are ever known.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Art (Painting) 89%, Dreaming 105%
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 40 -
THE PEN AND SWORD
The Pen and Sword is a small tavern owned by
an expatriate Filkharian couple, Ranyart and
Vasha Draven, and provides rich food and drink
but no accommodation. Ranyart is a superlative
chef, and Vasha (whose father was educated at
the University of Cadsandria in Argimiliar) is a
painter and poet. Sadly neither of the two has a
head for figures, and so their business constantly
struggles.
Despite their precarious existence, the
couple has established a reputation for The Pen
and Sword remarkably quickly. Word of their
fantastic menu has spread throughout the city,
while Vasha and her friends have also held
several successful poetry readings in the tavern
over recent months. Duke Avan himself dined
here only recently, while the feuding nobles
Lady Atania Almodo and Lady Nina Aracella
have also visited, although fortunately, on
separate occasions.
RATS’ PALACE
The worship of Theril, a Lady of Law, declined in
Vilmir when the city of Nadsokor (in which her
cult was based) fell to disease and Chaos in 113
YK. In Old Hrolmar the order dedicated to her
worship survived until the last of her monks were
carried off by the Yellow Plague in 250 YK. With
the monastery left to fall into disrepair, it was not
long before the beggars of Nadsokor claimed the
building as their own. It is because of their
residence that the ruined building has come to
be called ‘Rats’ Palace’ by those unfortunate
enough to know of its existence.
Today the building is a pestilential ruin. Its
belltower collapsed decades ago, sending bricks
and tiles spilling across the weed-choked
remains of the public plaza. The statue of the
goddess long since removed, goats and curs now
scavenge through its empty hallways.
It is entirely possible that some ancient
treasure of the order waits to be found amidst the
decay: an enchanted harp which never needs
tuning, a quill which cannot be used to write lies
or sign false confessions, or a volume of poetry
which opens the reader’s minds to the presence
of closely aligned planes. Anyone seeking out
such treasures must first deal with the beggars
who reside here, and who would inevitably
attempt to claim such riches as their own.
Led by the vile Ramirez the Pustulant, (the
representative of King Urish of Nadsokor) the
beggars make their home below street level in
the partially flooded cellars of the building. It is
from here that they creep out to beg and
intimidate the residents of the city, returning to
Rats’ Palace with their loot. King Urish takes a
generous 50% tithe from all that they raise, and
convoys of beggars embark on foot every week
to Nadsokor to deliver this money to him.
For more information about the beggars of
Old Hrolmar see PLOTS AND POWERS.
THE ROSE GARDEN
The phrase ‘to pluck a rose’ is Vilmirian slang for
the act of hiring a prostitute, and this ironically
named and dilapidated building in Bent Street is
one of the least savoury brothels in Old Hrolmar.
The women who work here are predominantly
criminals; robbery, rather than sex, is their actual
trade. Luring drunken men back to their rooms
from elsewhere in the city, theyrob them with
the aid of the other working girls before driving
the inebriated and beaten men back out into the
street. Most of the workers here are alcoholics,
and many of them are diseased. The brothel’s
madam is Rosa De Silva, a corpulent and
aggressive woman with a shrewish and cruel
nature. A series of tunnels and secret doors
throughout the Rose Garden connects it with
many of its neighbouring buildings.
SAINT T’AARGANO’S HOUSE OF
WELCOME
This three-storey building is a dosshouse for the
itinerant and homeless. With the first two floors
consisting of tightly packed, narrow bunk beds,
residents are charged one bronze coin for the
privilege of sleeping on a thin straw mattress and
covered with an even thinner blanket. The third
floor provides cheaper accommodation still, and
for the cost of three groats, residents’ sleep sitting
upright on wooden benches - prevented from
falling over by being lashed together with heavy
hemp ropes. Only the desperate and the truly
needy seek shelter here. A breakfast of gruel and
old bread is served to all stayers each morning,
together with a prayer service, with those
refusing to join in the prayers not allowed
breakfast. The Brotherhood of T’aargano the 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 41 -
Great, an order of monks based in the Duchy of
Ordis, operates the house.
ROSTIK OF LASHMAR
AGENT OF HIONHURN AND INSANE
KILLER, AGE 28
One of the current residents of the House of Welcome is
a Shazarian agent of Chaos, a secret worshipper of
Hionhurn the Executioner, who has only recently arrived
in Old Hrolmar. Rostik of Lashmar is a burly, weathered
man in his late 20’s, with a matted mane and beard of
filthy, lice-infected blonde hair, and mad, pale eyes.
He prowls the world offering up those who will not be
missed to his dark god, always killing in the same way:
first strangling from behind, then cutting out his victims’
eyes before he swiftly and savagely guts their corpses.
As well as spreading Chaos in this way, the evil Rostik
also seeks to sway the down and out towards the
worship of Entropy. If Law has abandoned you to a life of
squalor and misery, he argues, how can Chaos be any
worse? Luckily Rostik’s madness ensures that he makes
few converts, although those he fails to persuade are
swiftly offered up as sacrifices to the Lord of Gibbets.
CHAOS 91, BALANCE 23, LAW 28
STR 18, CON 16, SIZ 18, INT 12, POW 12, DEX 16,
APP 9 HP 17
HIT POINTS: 17 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Dirk 120% 1d4+2+db+2d10
(demon dirk)
Garrotte 95% special
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: Demon Dirk
SKILLS: Climb 90%, Dodge 65%, Hide 85%, Jump 65%,
Move Quietly 90%, Ride 55%, Search 78%, Trap 85%
FROSTFANG
 ROSTIK’S LESSER DEMON DIRK
This black blade writhes and undulates as if alive (which
in a sense it is). Its need is to be bathed in vitreous
humour and aqueous humour (the liquid contents of the
human eye) once a week.
INT 10, POW 10
ABILITY: Demon Weapon, adds 2d10 damage
SWEETWATER WELL
This low, stone walled well is caped with a
warped wooden lid that has been rarely lifted
since the water dried up. Locals know that the
well provides access to the network of tunnels
and sewers beneath the city, although it is only
used at night to avoid attention.
VILS WELL
Named after Vil Valario, this well provides the
Foreign Quarter with most of its fresh water. It
stands in a small open square ringed about by a
number decaying tenement buildings, all of
uniform height and appearance. A communal
bucket attached to a fraying rope is used to raise
the water for drinking and bathing purposes.
WELL STREET TENEMENT BUILDING
This three-story building overlooks Vil’s Well,
and is typical of the many over-crowded houses
in the Foreign Quarter. A coiner (a maker of
counterfeit coins) lives in one of the first floor
rooms, a widow and her six children in another,
while the basement is home to an elderly,
alcoholic cobbler and his brood of filthy
children. The upper floors are home to a newly
arrived family of refugees from the duchy of
Jadmar, whose clothes and meagre belongings
are still caked with dust, while a family of
pickpockets and thieves live in the room
opposite them, and are the source of countless
fights and accusations within the building.
Other residents include a drunken
nightwatchman who struggles to sleep by day,
an elderly streetwalker down on her luck, and a
drug-addicted young poet from Cadsandria who
is slowly dying of consumption. There are two
rooms free to let in this building should the
adventurers be seeking accommodation. The
landlord the penny-pinching tailor and guildmaster,
Calvan Zagosa, whose place of business
can be found in Threadneedle Street.
THE WHITE LEOPARD
This modest inn on Well Street is the centre of
the local Jharkorian community. More than one
exile from the West plots a triumphant return to
Dhakos from this establishment, aided and
abetted by compatriots at home and abroad.
Accommodation here costs 6 bronzes for a spot
on the floor near the fire, 15 bronzes for a
dormitory bed and 48 bronzes for night for a
private room. The innkeeper is Harmiss of
Sequaloris, a gaunt, dark-complexioned man to
whom intrigue is as natural as breathing.
HILLTOWN DISTRICT
The district known as Hilltown (or colloquially
as Snob’s Hill) is located in the southeast corner
of the city, and is home to the sandstone fortress
of Duke Avan and the barracks of the Grey
Defenders. In addition, many of the city’s 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 42 -
nobility and various well-to-do merchants reside
in this district (although tradition demands that
the two circles rarely intersect except at certain
prescribed social gatherings throughout the
year). With the changes ushered in by the duke,
unsurprisingly, many of these once-dour
mansions are being transformed into ostentatious
displays of wealth through the addition of new
storeys, towers and fanciful architecture.
The streets of Hilltown are uniformly broad
and well paved, and here even the sidestreets
are cobbled. Most of the area is laid out on a
systematic grid, thanks to the early architects
who oversaw its construction. The district is
heavily patrolled and adventurers who venture
here will be stopped and questioned regularly
unless they are members of the nobility or in
their direct employ. Although early mornings see
servants and slaves hurrying to market, the
district’s streets are otherwise quiet for most of
the day, ensuring that strangers are all the more
visible.
THE ALMODO MANSION
Formerly the home of Lord Forrick and Lady
Ninta Almodo, this sprawling Hill Street mansion
is now, following the couple’s deaths at sea, the
residence of their only daughter, Lady Atania.
Although Lord Forrick has only been dead a
year, were he still alive, he would no longer
recognise his ancestral home, as it has been
spectacularly and garishly renovated. Today the
mansion hosts regular soirees and salons, with
art, music, poetry and philosophy the dominant
topics of conversation.
The mansion is a riot of decorative
architecture and fanciful towers, and has only
recently been completed. At the party thrown to
celebrate its renovation, Lady Nina Aracella,
Lady Atania’s rival was heard to loudly dismiss
the mansion as a ghastly union of styles, which
amply demonstrates the adage that ‘money can
buy everything except taste’. Fortunately,
Atania’s retort has not been recorded.
LADY ATANIA ALMODO
MODISH NOBLEWOMAN, AGE 23,
Having recently come into a sizeable inheritance
following her parent’s accidental drowning; this young
noblewoman has rapidly established herself as a
prominent patron of the arts. Some of her peers sniff that
Lady Atania had scarcely allowed time for a proper
period of mourning before enthusiastically renovating the
family home. Atania is enamoured of Ilmioran fashions,
and displays rather more cleavage than is considered
proper in a Vilmirian lady. She is also over-fond of rouge
and lipstick.
CHAOS 05, BALANCE 15, LAW 31
STR 11, CON 13, SIZ 11, INT 14, POW 15, DEX 17,
APP 16
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 65% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 85%, Art (Dancing) 80%, Art
(Embroidery) 56%, Appraise Art 65%, Flirt 75%, Insight
55%, Oratory 48%, Own Language (Common) 75%,
Resist Flattery 15%, Scent/Taste 45%, Scribe 52%
ARACELLA HOUSE
This prominent house, set amidst an immaculate
garden dotted with statuary, flowerbeds,
fountains and a grotto, is the home of Dame
Nina Aracella. The Aracella family is one of the
oldest and most influential in the city. Dame
Nina’s son Lord Jorivol is the titular head of the
clan and he and his fertile wife Lara, along with
their boisterous brood of children, live in the
east wing of the mansion.
DAME NINA ARACELLA
PATRON OF THE ARTS, AGE 63
This elderly widow considers herself the barometer of
good taste in Old Hrolmar. She dresses simply but
stylishly, and is fond of scarves and other accessories
that conceal her encroaching age. Her grand mansion
stands on Upper Fort Street, and is an understated
example of the new architectural craze currently
sweeping the city.
Dame Nina has enthusiastically embraced Duke Avan’s
ways. Her patronage of those artists she considers
talented is legendary, although some of her peers
insinuate that her habit of installing young poets and
composers in private apartments at her own expense is
more to do with the young men’s good looks rather than
their skills.
CHAOS 17, BALANCE 32, LAW 57
STR 8, CON 14, SIZ 10, INT 17, POW 16, DEX 10,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Hatpin 75% 1d3+db
Dagger (Mother-of-Pearl) 60% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 90%, Art (Dancing) 65%, Art
(Embroidery) 76%, Appraise Art 85%, Flirt 50%, Insight
75%, Oratory 80%, Own Language (Common) 85%,
Predict Trend 45%, Resist Flattery 75%, Scent/Taste 65%,
Scribe 35%, Young Kingdoms 55%
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 43 -
THE ASTRAN ESTATE
The home of Count Rodrigo Astran and his pale
wife Elena stands on Upper Fort Street, barely a
stone’s throw from the ducal fortress. This grim
sandstone building witnesses regular meetings of
Old Hrolmar’s discontented and conservative
nobility. Its grounds are large, well tended but
unimaginative, with a sweeping gravel drive and
a small ornamental pond its only features. The
grounds are notable for being surrounded by a
well-maintained hedge rather than a sandstone
wall.
COUNT RODRIGO ASTRAN
IMPATIENT PLOTTER, AGE 59,
The Machiavellian Count Rodrigo is the younger brother
of the late Duke Culvan and as such is the uncle of Duke
Avan Astran, and the impatient heir to the ducal throne.
His sour face is heavily lined with age and resentment,
and his cold grey eyes glitter beneath bushy eyebrows.
Rodrigo is tall, thin, stooped, and bald. Like most
Vilmirian nobles he goes clean-shaven and conservatively
dressed, and rigidly adheres to the doctrines of the
Church of Law.
The count is one of the leading lights of the city’s
conservative faction, and he and his peers meet regularly
to shake their heads and cluck their tongues over Avan’s
licentious and un-Vilmirian behaviour. Rodrigo is more
vehement than any of his peers in his criticism of the
duke, and many of his outbursts border on the
treasonous, driven by his ambition and hatred for his
popular nephew. His peers consider Rodrigo’s displays of
emotion impolite, and several have commented upon the
irony of such an un-Vilmirian display being provoked by
Rodrigo’s condemnation of similar traits in his despised
nephew.
It was Count Rodrigo who hired the Mereghn to try and
kill Avan in the years immediately after the young duke’s
coronation, although nowhaving failed at such direct
attempts upon Avan’s life, the count has turned his mind
to more devious ways of unseating his nephew.
Aware that the influx of foreigners into Old Hrolmar is
unpopular in some quarters, Rodrigo has begun to
consider how he can turn the tide of sentiment against
his nephew. He is also quick to spread rumours that
Avan is involved in illegal or heretical actions, although
so far Vilmir’s King Naclon and Cardinal Garrick have
failed to move against Avan despite these attempts to
blacken his reputation.
Despite his rigidly conservative present position, the
count had a debauched youth, a fact he is at pains to
conceal, and which fuels much of his rage against the
duke, who acts as an uncomfortable reminder of certain
events that Rodrigo would rather forget. His increasingly
obsessive vendetta against Duke Avan has ensured that
even his own son, once loyal to his cause, grows weary
of the count’s strident litany of complaints and
calumnies. As a result the count has begun to favour his
illegitimate son, the guard captain Franchist Fernando,
over his appointed heir. Captain Franchist’s lack of moral
scruples only increases his standing in his father’s
jaundiced eyes. (See the East Gate in Distinctive
Landmarks of Old Hrolmar above for more information on
Captain Franchist Fernando.)
CHAOS 31, BALANCE 08, LAW 40
STR 10, CON 14, SIZ 14, INT 15, POW 14, DEX 10,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Half Plate (Helm
On) 1d8+1
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 90% 1d6+db
Light Mace 83% 1d6+2+db
Short Spear 76% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 85% 1D4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Courtly Manners) 66%, Evaluate 80%,
Insight 75%, Oratory 60%, Own Language (Common)
85%, Plot And Scheme 90%, Ride 80%, Scribe 45%,
Search 74%, Young Kingdoms 40%
EARL EDUARDO ASTRAN
 DILETTANTE, AGE 29
Cousin to Duke Avan and son of the conservative Count
Rodrigo, this arrogant young noble has lately developed
a reputation as a fop and a drunkard, much to his father’s
distaste. As he is unmarried, Eduardo still lives at home
with his parents, although he is rarely to be found there,
being overly fond of patronising Old Hrolmar’s brothels
and gaming houses. Most days see Eduardo drunk by
midday.
Although handsome enough by Vilmirian standards, his
lips are thin and his chin is weak. He has soft brown eyes
that are invariably bloodshot, and thinning brown hair.
Although he favours traditional garments, their fabric is
always of the very highest quality.
Eduardo is a bully and a coward, and is also addicted to
gambling. He is a welcome player at the seedy Cat’s
Alley gaming house run by Pericho Toribio in the
Merchants’ Quarter, having exhausted the patience and
credit of most other venues in the city. At present
Eduardo is more than 40,000 bronzes in debt to various
individuals. He is loathe to ask his father for help,
knowing that in return for paying off his debtors, Count
Rodrigo will demand his assistance in yet another of his
interminable schemes against the duke.
CHAOS 18, BALANCE 03, LAW 24
STR 10, CON 13, SIZ 14, INT 12, POW 11, DEX 10,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 75% 1d6+db
Dagger 55% 1D4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 75%, Bargain 75%, Cheat At
Cards 55%, Evaluate 65%, Insight 35%, Oratory 45%,
Own Language (Common) 80%
BARRACKS
Nestled on the lower slopes of Fort Street are the
barracks of Old Hrolmars Grey Defenders. . A
complex consisting of four large, two-story
buildings of whitewashed sandstone and redtiled
roofs, it forms an enclosed square,
colloquially known as ‘the Quadrangle’ amongst
the city watch and their intimates. It is here, on 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 44 -
this central training ground, that the Grey
Defenders are drilled, taught and tested.
Entry to the complex is via an arched tunnel
in the centre of the main building, which houses
the armoury and administrative offices.. One of
these rooms is a library dedicated to the art of
war, containing books and scrolls describing the
tactics and strategies of the great battles of the
Young Kingdoms. Another room features a broad
table supporting a scale model of the city and
the surrounding lands, and upon which small
miniatures are marshalled to assist young officers
in honing their military skills.
The left hand building of the ‘Quad’is given
over to the troops’ sleeping quarters: a series of
large dormitory rooms on the first floor occupied
by serried rows of bunk beds for the enlisted
men, with private rooms for the officers located
upstairs. Facing the gate, across the training
grounds from the entry arch, are the stables,
while the fourth quadrangle building (to the right
of the main entrance) hosts the mess hall,
kitchens, and a warehouse containing six months
worth of supplies to be used in the event of
famine or siege.
COL. CALVAN GUERRERO
COMMANDER OF THE GUARD, AGE 51
Despite his encroaching age, Colonel Calvan is still hale
and hearty thanks to an astute combination of diet and
exercise. He does not drink, and eats only in
moderation. His one vice is the love of a good woman,
which more than once got him into hot water. The
colonel is unmarried, but has several mistresses and
numerous illegitimate offspring. He is not a handsome
man, with a badly set nose and a tanned, scarred face,
but he is an excellent soldier. His short-cropped hair
and long black beard are both shot through with grey.
Although he holds grave concerns over the city’s future
in light of the foreign rabble settling here in everincreasing
numbers, Colonel Calvan’s devotion to the
ducal throne ensures his public support of Duke Avan.
CHAOS 19, BALANCE 16, LAW 45
STR 15, CON 14, SIZ 14, INT 13, POW 17, DEX
14, APP 8
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Leather and Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 125% 1d6+1+db
Broadsword 110% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 85% 1d4+2+db
Hunting Bow 90% 1d6+1+1/2db
Cavalry Lance 115% 1d8+1+db
(+horse db when charging)
Kite Shield 96% 1d4+db+kb
SPELLS: Hell’s Armour (1-4), Hell’s Razor (1-4), Speed
Of Vezhan (1-3), Suppleness of Xiombarg (3)
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: Two Air Elementals,
bound into his constantly swirling blue cloak, allow the
colonel to safely ‘fly’ short distances carried on the wind
they generate; thereafter the elementals must rest for a
number of minutes equal to the colonel’s size
SKILLS: Bargain 95%, Dodge 85%, Insight 90%, Lead
Troops 105%, Oratory 96%, Ride 105%, Search 85%,
Track 45%, Young Kingdoms 50%
SERGEANT NUNO BALTAZAR
 CORRUPT GUARD, AGE 35
A drunkard, a bully and a coward, Sergeant Nuno is a
disgrace to the good name of the Grey Defenders. He
has, on several occasions, turned a blind eye to various
nefarious activities in return for a purse of gold. At
present, Nuno is on his best behaviour following a strict
final warning from the colonel, but it will not be long
before he slips back into his own ways once more. He
seeks to exploit every situation for personal gain, and
weasels his way out of most situations by blaming his
subordinates.
CHAOS 29, BALANCE 10, LAW 32
STR 15, CON 17, SIZ 16, INT 12, POW 9, DEX 13,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 17 ARMOUR: Leather and Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 70% 1d6+1+db
Javelin 85% 1d6+1/2db
OLD HROLMAR’S GREY DEFENDERS
The Hrolmarlian Grey Defenders number just a single regiment of 1000
men in total. Their commanding officer is Colonel Calvan Guerrero, who
reports directly to Duke Avan Astran. The majority of Colonel Calvan’s
men are loyal to the duke and extremely trustworthy, but a small number
of them will be open to bribes and other forms of corruption as the
Gamemaster sees fit. The base wage for a member of the Grey Defenders
is 65 bronzes/week; this high rate of pay helps reduce the possibility of
the rank and file troops being susceptible to turning a blind eye to
criminal acts.
The regiment consists of four battalions of 250 men each, who in turn
supplies Defenders, on a rostered basis, to their assigned City Gate
guardhouses (see The City Gates above). The First Battalion consists of
the regiment’s cavalry unit, and is predominantly an elite group of minor
nobles (some 100 in total) together with their batmen and servants. The
three other battalions are all well-trained and well-disciplined infantry
who see it their duty to protect Old Hrolmar from evil and corruption.
The Grey Defenders wear long coats of leather and rings beneath
the long grey tabards that give them their name, as well as conical helms
with a nasal guard. The standard soldier on guard duty carries a large kite
shield and a short-sword and javelin, while, in the event of a threat or
siege, all infantry are issued broadswords, lances and hunting bows. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 45 -
Brawl 75% 1d3+db
Kite Shield 75% 1d4+db+kb
SKILLS: Bargain 65%, Conceal Object 70%, Dodge 80%,
Evaluate 55%, Insight 65%, Young Kingdoms 45%
CORPORAL LEON BERODIAN
IDEALISTIC YOUTH, AGE 19
Corporal Leon is an innocent young guardsman of
humble birth, but noble heart. He is betrothed to his
childhood sweetheart, but has refused to marry her until
he has reached the rank of sergeant, knowing that love
alone cannot support them on his current wage. His wide
brown eyes and square jaw ensure that he comes under
considerable attention from the ladies, as well as a
degree of good-natured ribbing from his fellow Grey
Defenders.
CHAOS 03, BALANCE 07, LAW 14
STR 14, CON 16, SIZ 16, INT 13, POW 14, DEX 12,
APP 15
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: Leather and Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 70% 1d6+1+db
Javelin 75% 1d6+1/2db
Brawl 65% 1d3+db
Kite Shield 70% 1d4+db+kb
SKILLS: Climb 65%, Dodge 55%, Insight 50%, Search
65%, Track 50%
THE BOTANIST’S HOUSE
This solid sandstone residence on Upper River
Street is overgrown with ivy and displays signs of
disrepair. Nevertheless glimpses of its garden,
visible from the street through the wrought iron
gate, reveals a rich, emerald anarchy, which is
the subject of much local rumour and jealousy.
This is the residence of Viscount Mendo Ferrand,
a minor Hrolmarlian noble and the last of his
line. Having no heirs or family to support, the
Viscount has been free to squander his wealth on
his hobby (although obsession might be a better
word to describe his motivating passion), botany.
The rear of his house has been extended to
form a giant glittering greenhouse, in which
cuttings from most of this plane’s plant kingdom
are represented. From rare orchids to poisonous
blooms, and even one or two semi-sentient and
carnivorous species said to hail from the
Melnibonéan isle of Kiashu, almost every kind of
plant known in the Young Kingdoms (and some
which are unknown) is represented in the
Viscount’s collection.
Of late Viscount Mendo has taken delivery
of a strange seedpod that reputedly hails from
the Haghan’iin Forest in the Unknown East.
Although he does not know if it will bloom, he
devotedly tends its bed of moss and soil day and
night, nervously chewing his nails while he
awaits signs of the seed’s fertility. If it flowers, he
plans to name the new bloom after Duke Avan.
VISCOUNT MENDO FERRAND
OBSESSED BOTANIST, AGE 43
Although his interest in the botanical realm is common
knowledge amongst his peers, few of Old Hrolmar’s
nobility take Viscount Mendo’s passion seriously (save,
that is, for one or two whose jaded facades hide a keener
interest, which would no doubt betray their secret
allegiances were it to be revealed).
CHAOS 15, BALANCE 21, LAW 45
STR 12, CON 14, SIZ 13, INT 17, POW 16, DEX 11,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Secateurs 80% 1d4+1+db
SKILLS: Craft (Gardening) 85%, Natural World 80%,
Other Language (Melnibonéan) 55%, Ride 65%, Scribe
80%, Unknown Kingdoms 10%, Young Kingdoms 65%
CHURCH OF TOVIK
The White Lord Tovik the Relentless is the patron
of warriors and soldiers, and fittingly his church
(one of several smaller churches located around
the city) is situated opposite the barracks on Fort
Street. Monuments to those members of the Grey
Defenders who have died nobly in battle stand
in the church’s drab gardens, while its crypt
houses the tombs of Old Hrolmar’s greatest
heroes. A squat tower rises above the church,
although its leaden bell is only rung in times of
war, to sound the alarm and call the city’s
defenders to arms.
Guarded night and day by six red-robed
warrior-priests of Tovik, whose statistics are
supplied in the HROLMARLIAN DIGEST, the church
is home to one of the great treasures of the
Church of Law in Vilmir: the iron gauntlet of
T’aargano the Great, Defender of Chaos, which
is kept in a gold and ivory reliquary behind the
altar. T’aargano, who died driving back the
invading army of Chaos that threatened the
entire Northern Continent in 202 YK, was a
faithful servant of Tovik. His sword and shield
are held at the copper temple of Tovik in Uhaio, 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 46 -
his breastplate in his birthplace of Maldam, in
the dusty Duchy of Ordis, and other relics of his
life and deeds are scattered across Vilmir.
The hero is revered in Old Hrolmar, but not
worshipped. A regular trickle of adherents of
T’aargano’s cult visit this church as part of their
pilgrimage, and at least one of their number can
be found kneeling before the reliquary almost
every day, praying that T’aargano will return to
save Vilmir in its hour of greatest need.
THE DOMINGO MANSION
Hidden away behind a high sandstone wall
capped with iron spikes, this grim mansion on
Steadfast Street is the home of the elderly Lord
Garçilaso Domingo. Although he lives alone,
save for his servants, rumour has it that a sad and
pale face can sometimes be seen gazing out of
an attic window on moonlit nights. Lord
Garçilaso’s children are among Old Hrolmar’s
wildest young nobles, and their father is
regularly required to pay off his daughters’
gambling debts and the paternity suites incurred
by his hellraising sons.
LORD GARÇILASO DOMINGO
ALOOF NOBLEMAN, AGE 75
The thin and bloodless Lord Garçilaso Domingo is a pale
widower who is well known for the short lifespan of his
slaves and the scandalous behaviour of his children.
Following the death of his wife during the birth of their
fifth child 25 years ago, Lord Garçilaso spoilt his children
excessively, acceding to their every demand. It is said
that his youngest son, Ramon, passed away several years
ago, while his remaining offspring are all active
participants in Old Hrolmar’s high society – some
notoriously so. Lord Garçilaso is forever paying off their
debts, hushing up their brawls, and failing utterly to keep
them under control.
Garçilaso secretly owns a profitable but illegal brothel in
New Hrolmar, The Wreath of Roses. The venue was
established in order to provide a safe outlet for the
depraved tastes of his insane son Ramon, who the family
declared dead several years ago, the victim of a virulent
fever. A weighted coffin was buried at his lavish funeral,
and Ramon now lives under lock and key in the attic of
the Domingo mansion.
Lord Garçilaso strives to ensure that Ramon’s existence
and his involvement with the Wreath of Roses remains
unknown, and will not hesitate to order the deaths of
anyone who discovers these secrets.
CHAOS 27, BALANCE 11, LAW 51
STR 13, CON 14, SIZ 11, INT 14, POW 13,
DEX 13, APP 11
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 87% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 70% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Bargain 60%, Evaluate 65%, Insight 70%,
Listen 50%, Oratory 70%, Ride 75%, Scribe 50%
LORD RAMON DOMINGO
CRIMINALLY INSANE NOBLEMAN
Although he can seem handsome and urbane, Ramon
Domingo is incurably insane, and prone to fits of
uncontrollable rage. His ragged and unkempt appearance
is due to the fact that he is liable to strangle any servant
that is ordered to assist with his grooming, while his
sexual appetite is violent in the extreme. The Wreath of
Roses brothel in New Hrolmar was founded in order than
Ramon could sate his bestial appetites once a month; the
unfortunate prostitutes who are singled out for his
favours rarely survive the encounter. Vilmirians consider
insanity a curse of Law, and Ramon’s existence is the
secret shame of the Domingo family.
CHAOS 45, BALANCE 05, LAW 17
STR 17, CON 14, SIZ 15, INT 8, POW 11, DEX 14,
APP 15 HP 15
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 85% 1d3+db
Dagger 90% 1d4+2+db
Wrestle 80% special
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 36%, Climb 80%, Dodge
68%, Hide 75%, Jump 65%, Listen 74%, Move Quietly
80%, Mutter Incoherently 99%, Own Language
(Common) 55%, Ride 35%
DUCAL FORTRESS
This squat functional fortress, built of ubiquitous
Vilmirian sandstone, rises high above Old
Hrolmar from its dominant Hilltown position. A
30-foot high barbican wall, whose foundations
are set deep into the granite outcrop from which
the fortress rises, encloses the fort’s entire
perimeter. The steep avenue known as Fort Street
culminates here in a broad series of low steps
leading up to the gatehouse, which is guarded
by two strong towers, each 40 feet tall.
Crenellations provide cover for archers atop the
barbican wall and the gatehouse towers, while
arrow slits in the shape of the Arrow of Law look
down onto the streets below.
THE RIGHT GAUNTLET OF T’AARGANO THE GREAT
This heavy iron gauntlet will only fit a person of SIZ 17-18. When worn
by one whose allegiance to Law is 60 points or greater, and at least 30
points higher than any other allegiance, it bestows an additional 1D6
damage to all their blows; 2D6 if the target is a demon or similar creature
of Chaos. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 47 -
Inside the barbican rises the keep, a solid
rectangular building whose walls stand 60 feet in
height. Each corner of the keep, save for the
southeast, is topped by a squat, round tower
rising a further 20 feet, and again crenellated.
From the southernmost corner of the keep rises
the Watchful Tower, rising 40 feet above the
keep. Its rooftop stands a full 100 feet above
ground level, and provides a startling view
across the city from which eagle-eyed guards
survey both the land and sea approaches to Old
Hrolmar.
Although the fort is the official residence of
the duke, Avan Astran prefers to reside in a
newly renovated villa on the West Bank of the
river, a fact that has provoked much head
shaking and chin-stroking among the city’s
nobility. The dowager Duchess Lennara (Duke
Avan’s aging and widowed mother) still lives in
the fortress, however, together with her retinue
of attentive maids and servants. Lennara is said
to be deeply concerned by her son’s liberal rule.
Her statistics and background are provided in
PLOTS AND POWERS.
The fort is also the seat of government in
the duchy, and as such is also home to
numerous clerks and state officials, who concern
themselves with such important matters as taxes,
tithes and the day to day running of the duchy.
Several ghosts are said to haunt the fortress,
including that of the unhappy young Lady Astra
Astran, the late daughter of Duke Avan’s greatgrandfather,
Duke Gaspar Astran. Having been
forbidden by her father to marry the young
soldier whom she loved, Astra threw herself from
the Watchful Tower after the boy was killed in a
skirmish in
the lands
now known
as the
Vilmirian
Protectorates
(where, of
course, Duke Gaspar had sent him out of spite).
Lady Astra’s tomb can be found in the ducal
crypt, deep in the bedrock beneath the fort,
alongside those of countless other members of
the Astran lineage.
Another ghost haunts the fort’s chapel,
although it is only rarely seen. It is said to be the
shade of a treacherous scholar, Toribio of Sheff,
who turned to the worship of Chardros during
the reign of the Yellow Plague in 250 YK, and,
for his sins, is unable to find rest after his death.
In certain circles it is whispered that those who
pray over Toribio’s unmarked grave in the
fortress grounds will gain power over death.
Others claim that his body is buried elsewhere,
and that if ever his tomb is found it will contain
certain, terrible enchantments that he took with
him to his grave. (The chapel ghost is actually
that of the late Duke Arvido Astran, who as a
child was tutored by Toribio of Sheff, and who
was almost murdered by him. For more
information see the section The Order of Endless
Night in PLOTS AND POWERS.)
DUKE AVAN’S RESIDENCE
Never one to allow tradition to impede him,
Duke Avan refuses to live in the cramped, cold
rooms of the ducal fort, and has instead taken up
residence in a newly renovated manor house on
the west bank of the Hrol. With its circular tower
and flagpole-capped, conical spire, and
elaborate pediments, balustrades and wroughtiron
lacework adorning its balconies, the house
is one of the grandest in the city.
The house is richly furnished, and on the
rare occasions the duke opens his doors for a
party or a poetry reading, it is crowded with
eager visitors. Its upper floors look out over
Serenity Park to the Pyramid of Law, while the
lower rooms are crammed with souvenirs from
the duke’s many travels. These include barbaric
carvings from the Weeping Waste, a full suit of
wood and leather armour from the Sighing
Desert, the skull of a sea serpent, and a
collection of scrolls, books and manuscripts to
rival the great
library of the
University of
Cadsandria.
Most
days see the
commonfolk
of Old Hrolmar clustered outside the estate’s
wrought iron gates, seeking the ear of the duke,
be it for a pardon for their thieving brother or a
word about a cheating merchant. Penitents,
petitioners and others wait beside them,
clutching at the cloaks of any whom are lucky
enough to gain entrance and begging them to
plead with Avan on their behalf.
“He’s Avan Astran of Old Hrolmar,” grunted Count
Smiorgan… “He’s well known as an adventurer –
explorer - trader. His reputation’s the best. We can
trust him, Elric.”
SIMORGAN TO ELRIC, THE SAILOR ON THE SEAS OF FATE, I, 1
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 48 -
Travellers, hawkers, merchants and
strangers call at the house day and night, for the
duke’s interests in the bizarre are well known,
and many a merchant will make a beeline for
the duke’s residence upon arriving in Old
Hrolmar in the hope of selling him some rare
item or curio.
The duke’s personal staff, too, are a strange
collection of fellows, and include a hoary
soothsayer from Dharijor, a squat Yurit
gardener, and a Pan Tangian woman said by
some to be the duke’s lover, and to others, his
bodyguard. His body-servant is the strangest of
all: a half-Melnibonéan brother and sister who
are conjoined twins, fused at the hip, with four
arms, four legs, and two wise heads shared
between them, - although the male of the pair is
much less serious than his sister.
DUKE AVAN ASTRAN
EXPLORER AND ADVENTURER, AGE 35
CHAOS 13, BALANCE 38, LAW 62
STR 15, CON 16, SIZ 14, INT 13, POW 13, DEX
14, APP 12
HIT POINTS: 15* ARMOUR: Half Plate (Helm
On) 1d8+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Greatsword 120% 2d8+db
Broadsword 97% 1d8+1+db
Spear 76% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 85% 1d4+2+db
Full Shield 85% 1d4+db+kb
SPELLS: Buzzard Eyes (1), Demon’s Ear (1), Hell’s
Armour (1-4), Hell’s Sharp Flame (1-4), Soul Of Chardros
(1-3), Tread Of Cran Liret (1-4)
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 65%, Art (Courtly Manners)
60%, Bargain 67%, Climb 35%, Conceal Object 54%,
Disguise 45%, Dodge 66%, Evaluate 52%, Insight 39%,
Jump 87%, Listen 76%, Million Spheres 06%, Move
Quietly 45%, Natural World 67%, Navigate 73%, Oratory
82%, Own Language (Common) 80%, Other Language
(Lesh) 15%, Other Language (Low Melnibonéan) 37%,
Other Language (Mong) 14%, Physik 62%, Pick Lock
32%, Ride 87%, Sailing 32%, Scribe 45%, Search 79%,
Swim 49%, Throw 61%, Track 52%, Unknown Kingdoms
15%, Young Kingdoms 77%
*Duke Avan has an important role to play in the future
history of Elric and the Young Kingdoms. If the
gamemaster wishes to run a campaign which follows
Moorcock’s Chronology he should survive any
encounters with the adventurers until the events of the
novel The Sailor On The Seas Of Fate, at which time he
is fated to be slain by Stormbringer.
NADJANA
BODYGUARD, AGE 26
Nadjana is a self-exiled Pan Tangian woman who
recognises beauty in Chaos, and left her homeland to
wander the Young Kingdoms. The duke saved her life
DUKE AVAN ASTRAN
A man of no mean reputation, Avan began revitalising Old Hrolmar upon
inheriting the mantle of Duke from Culvan Astran, his late father, in 395
YK. The years after Avan’s coronation saw the city full of artists, poets
and philosophers, while the air rang with the sound of hammering and
sawing. Scaffolds were a constant sight, as building after building
shrugged off the repressive Vilmirian restrictions on height and style.
Such renovations have gradually slowed, leaving the city much changed.
Saddly, with Avan’s death in 402, the new duke, appointed by Cardinal
Garrick, will begin the destruction of all that Avan achieved.
In his youth Avan was sent to Cadsandria to be educated, but
instead fell in with a travelling band of thieves. Returning to Old Hrolmar
when he was 19, he soon departed on further adventures. To date he has
travelled to Melniboné, Myyrrhn and the World’s Edge, and in 399 YK he
is well into planning a trip to the Unknown East (which is described in
detail in the Stormbringer supplement of the same name).
A brave man, Avan is sometimes foolhardy when adventure and
excitement promise. Avan has infiltrated at least one Chaos cult, and has
been known to occasionally curse using the name of Chardros. He fears
no man living, nor any god, and his courage and strength of nerve were
evident when several assassination attempts were made upon him shortly
after his coronation. Blaming the Ilmioran order of assassins known as
the Mereghn, Avan moved to drive them out of his city. While he has not
been totally successful in this task, he has certainly significantly disrupted
their activities in Old Hrolmar, to the point where the Mereghn’s new
leader (the previous Mereghn guildmaster died during an unsuccessful
attempt on the duke) has sued for peace between them. To date Avan has
not accepted the offered terms.
Unlike most Vilmirian nobles Avan is not ashamed to show his
wealth, favouring plumed helmets, gilded armour and rich garments,
although he dresses conservatively when called to Jadmar. A man of
foresight, he is also equipped with a fine sense of humour and irony.
Avan is charismatic, with a square handsome face. He is equally at ease
with princesor sailors, although he greatly prefers the company of the
latter. The duke’s fondness for masculine companionship is a valuable
secret among those in the city whose business it is to concern themselves
with the private affairs of others.
Despite being wooed by numerous eligible young ladies and their
families the duke remains unmarried, although he is aware of the need
for an heir, and has perforce of late begun considering a marriage of
convenience.
Avan’s sharp wits and keen mind allow him to keep to the letter of
the Law, while ingeniously finding freedom for himself and his people.
Avan is well read and well informed, and is a just and capable ruler who
moves freely about his city. He counts some of the best and brightest
minds in the Young Kingdoms as his friends and advisers, and is a
generous patron of the arts. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 49 -
during an unfortunate adventure in the Mountains of
Myyrrhn, and, as a result, she has consequently sworn by
Xiombarg to serve Avan until death claims her or he
releases her from his service. The duke strikes her as a
man who will work against Law without conscious
thought, and she works to support him as best she can,
delighting in the discomfort her presence causes most
Vilmirians.
She is slim and athletic, with a dark, angular face, a
shaven head and cool green eyes. She adopts masculine
dress beneath her red-dyed leather armour, usually
wearing loose trousers, soft shoes and long-sleeved
shirts in various shades of crimson, maroon and
vermillion. Her temperament is sardonic, her words
sarcastic, and her patience easily tried. She is Avan’s
shadow, and she follows him everywhere.
CHAOS 42, BALANCE 21, LAW 12
STR 15, CON 17, SIZ 12, INT 17, POW 23, DEX 16,
APP 15
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: Soft Leather (Helm
Off) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Greatsword 99% 2d8+db
Desert Bow 77% 1d8+2+1/2db
Dagger (Demon) 85% 1d4+2+db+1d10
SPELLS: Cloak of Cran Liret (1-4), Flames Of Kakatal (4),
Gift Of Grome (4), Summon Demon (1), Summon
Elemental (1), Suppleness Of Xiombarg (1-3), Tread Of
Cran Liret (1-4)
SKILLS: Climb 66%, Disguise 54%, Dodge 60%, Hide
53%, Listen 71%, Move Quietly 63%, Other Language
(Common) 60%, Other Language (Low Melnibonéan)
45%, Own Language (Mabden) 88%, Potions 39%, Ride
85%, Scribe 50%, Search 46%
HARRAXIS
LESSER DEMON DAGGER
A finely balanced dagger (Valaxicus breed) with a leafshaped
blade engraved with Mabden invocations to
Xiombarg, and an ivory hilt, it needs to be polished daily
with beeswax.
POW 14, INT 07
ABILITIES: Demon Weapon, Adds 1d10 Damage
GAOL
Although adjacent to the town barracks, Old
Hrolmar’s gaol is a separate structure, and is
overseen by the silver-robed priests of Donblas
rather than the Grey Defenders. Some rivalry
exists between the secular and religious
enforcers of Vilmirian law in Old Hrolmar, and
although it rarely results in anything more
serious than catcalling and good-natured
competition, the duke is always alert for signs
that more serious trouble may be brewing.
The majority of prisoners in the gaol have
been convicted for secular crimes, including
fraud, assault and murder. Those found guilty of
heresy are imprisoned for a short while prior to
their public execution in the town square, while
those convicted of treason are dispatched to the
salt mines of Sheff, in the Duchy of Dolgar,
where they are sentenced to life imprisonment.
Every year on Valario’s Day (16th Elordan)
Duke Avan releases one prisoner from the gaol
to symbolise the freedom that Vil Valario
brought to Vilmir. The duke himself decides this
prisoner’s identity, although naturally he pays
heed to the public’s petitions prior to making his
decision.
HROLSPRING
This spring of clear, fresh water bubbles up from
the rocks at the foot of the fort, and flows in a
swift, narrow channel down to the Hrol. It
supplies most of the drinking water for
Hilltown’s houses, although a separate well
inside the fort provides for the needs of the ducal
court.
THE NEW THEATRE
Hilltown is also home to Old Hrolmar’s lavish
new theatre, a baroque and fanciful building
with a 500-seat capacity, which has only
recently been completed. Unsurprisingly, its
stage has already played host to some of the best
acting troupes in the Young Kingdoms, although
some in the city whisper that such works are
hardly suitable for performance in respectable
Vilmir, and that theatre, with its focus on artifice
and people pretending to be what they are not,
is surely an artform that is rooted in Chaos.
Popular rumour has it that the theatre is already
haunted, although whether the ghost is that of
one of the several workmen who died during its
construction, or an older spirit disturbed by the
excavation of Melnibonéan ruins while the
building’s foundations were lain, can only be
guessed at.
THE OLD CORUNA RESIDENCE
This once-grand mansion on Spring Street stands
empty and ramshackle, awaiting new owners to
restore it to its former glory. Anyone buying or
inspecting the house will discover a mosaic
made of semi-precious stones, set into the floor
of the master bedroom on the first floor, which
depicts a map of the known world. Unknown to
all this mosaic is the binding for a powerful 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 50 -
demon, whose original owner used it to see
visions of distant lands and to spy upon his
enemies. If the mosaic is damaged in any way
(such as during renovations by a new owner) the
demon will be released after several centuries of
unwilling bondage.
ANGRY DEMON
In its natural form this demon (Breed Unknown)
resembles a giant orange crab with eight legs ending in
sharp pincers spaced unevenly around its carapace, and
eight cold, unblinking eyes set between them. Leathery
bat-like wings sprout from the centre of its shell allowing
it to hover in the air and strike at multiple targets
simultaneously.
STR 21, CON 18, SIZ 15, INT 21, POW 20, DEX 18,
APP 2
HIT POINTS: 17 MOVE: Scuttle 12/Fly 9
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
ABILITIES: Carapace, 1d10 Armour; Clawx8, 60%,
1d8+1d6;Far Seer, 90%, Views Distant Locations And
Shows Them To Binder For One Minute, 10 Mp Per 100
Miles Plus Another 1mp Per Additional Minute
SKILLS: climb 95%, dodge 80%, scuttle 100%, fly 100%,
wave claws menacingly 100%
NEED: To Be Told A Secret Once Per Week
MAGIC POINTS TO SUMMON: 45
THE REGALARRADO ESTATE
Located on Obedience Street, the family home of
the Regalarrado family is a solid, heavily fortified
mansion. Surrounded by a thick, high wall
topped with two rows of iron spikesit is an
imposing presence on an otherwise quiet street.
Guards patrol the grounds 24 hours a day, and
mount watch from a squat, four-walled tower
rising from the centre of the three-storey manor’s
tiled roof., The Regalarrado family has fought a
long and bloody feud with the Timoteo clan for
the past two centuries, as a result of the
Regalarrados’ betrayal of a Timoteo plot.
Although Duke Avan has forbidden open warfare
between the two families, the feud continues to
drag on, sometimes with fatal results.
LADY FORSTINA REGALARRADO
PILLAR OF RESPECTABILITY, AGE 61
This sour old woman long ago appointed herself the
moral barometer of Old Hrolmar. Since her husband
happily gave himself over to the peace of Mirath several
decades ago, Lady Forstina has been the uncontested
matriarch of the family. She is a close ally of Count
Rodrigo Astran, and often speaks out against the
excesses of Duke Avan. She is also a critic of the
licentious and decadent ways of her peers, Lady Almodo
and Dame Arracella, although such concerns come
second to her family’s feud with the Timoteo clan. Lady
Forstina’s personal grudge against Sir Augustin Timoteo,
who secretly wooed her in their youth before marrying
another, is the secret cause of much of her hatred of the
Regalarrado’s traditional rivals.
CHAOS 21, BALANCE 13, LAW 49
STR 8, CON 15, SIZ 11, INT 13, POW 14, DEX 9,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 55% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 70%, Art (Embroidery) 86%,
Doctrine Of Law 35%, Hold Grudge 99%, Insight 55%,
Oratory 60%, Own Language (Common) 75%, Resist
Flattery 85%, Scent/Taste 55%, Scribe 45%
LORD FODRIC REGALARRADO
HOT-HEADED YOUNG NOBLE, AGE 21
Lady Forstina dotes upon Fodric, her favourite grandson.
This young fop wants for nothing, and the best teachers
in the Young Kingdoms have ensured that he wields his
gold-hilted rapier with deadly proficiency. He is a pale
skinned youth, sporting serious grey eyes in a handsome
face that is framed by light-brown curls. When angry or
excited Fodric stutters, causing him to blush furiously. .
Lord Fodric is a sensitive and highly-strung individual,
quick to take offence at a glib comment. He is also
epileptic, and prone to unexpected and unpredictable
fits. Any who dare to speak of this will soon find
themselves the target of his ire. More than one young
Hrolmarlian noble bears a scar inflicted by Fodric’s rapier
to remind them that next time they would do better to
hold their tongue. Despite his privileged upbringing
Fodric is unhappy, although he cannot as yet articulate
what it is that he senses is missing from his life.
CHAOS 13, BALANCE 11, LAW 19
STR 14, CON 12, SIZ 10, INT 18, POW 13, DEX 15,
APP 16
HIT POINTS: 11 ARMOUR: Half Plate (Helm
Off) 1d8
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 101% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 72% 1d3+db
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 37%, Dodge 65%, Insight
45%, Jump 64%, Oratory 51%, Own Language 95%, Ride
80%, Scribe 51%, Swim 40%
THE TIMOTEO MANSION
A grand old home on Courage Street, and the
home of the Timoteo family, led by the elderly
Sir Augustin. The mansion is heavily guarded at
all times, to the extent that peacocks roam the
ground, their shrieks serving to warn the
residents should any unexpected visitors attempt
to gain entry to the property. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 51 -
The Timoteo family have long been
enemies of the Avan family, but since Duke
Avan claimed the throne Sir Augustin has thrown
his support behind the duke, much to the shock
of most of Old Hrolmar’s nobility. Many among
Count Rodrigo Astran’s supporters are trying to
woo the Timoteo family back to their more
traditionally conservative look, and while they
have had some success with younger members
of the family, their patriarch shows no signs of
changing his allegiance.
Many centuries ago the then head of the
family, Lord Pethron Timoteo, attempted to stage
a coup against the Duke Elgere Astran. The plot,
which seemed destined to succeed, was defeated
when a member of the Regalarrado family,
thought to be an ally of the Timoteos, betrayed
their plans. Ever since a fierce and deadly feud
has existed between the Timoteo and
Regalarrado families, one that still rages today.
SIR AUGUSTIN TIMOTEO
STUBBORN OLD NOBLEMAN, AGE 65
The greybeard Sir Augustin Timoteo is the head of one of
the oldest families in Old Hrolmar. He is a staunch
nationalist who believes that a revitalised Vilmir can,
once again, become a major power in the Young
Kingdomsif the conservative forces that doom his nation
can be stopped. For this reason, although his family has
never previously supported the Avans, Sir Augustin has
publicly come out in favour of Duke Avan’s enlightened
rule.
Fiercely passionate despite his age, Sir Augustin is
bitterly opposed to any attempts to end the feud
between the Regalarrado clan and his family. As a rash
youth he fell in love with Lady Forstina Regalarrado, and
would have eloped with her had his father not got wind
of the affair, and forced Augustin to marry his cousin
Isahble.
CHAOS 21, BALANCE 28, LAW 43
STR 11, CON 13, SIZ 10, INT 14, POW 14, DEX 8,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 75% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 50% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 45% 1d3+db
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 65%, Evaluate 75%, Hold
Grudge 85%, Insight 65%, Oratory 65%, Own Language
(Common) 80%, Scribe 67%
LORD ESTEBAN TIMOTEO
SARDONIC YOUTH, AGE 19
Lord Esteban Timoteo is Sir Augustin’s grandson, and a
sharp-tongued and sardonic young man who takes little
interest in the affairs of his elders. He is a handsome,
elegant youth, and popular with the ladies, although he
rarely returns their interest, preferring to listen to
travellers’ tales and the discourse of poets and
philosophers rather than idle away his hours in the
company of his peers. Despite pleading to be allowed to
study at the University of Cadsandria, Esteban was forced
to gain his education in Vilmir. He longs to travel, craves
intellectual stimulation, and is not entirely happy with
the direct his life seems to be heading.
CHAOS 13, BALANCE 11, LAW 19
STR 14, CON 12, SIZ 10, INT 18, POW 13, DEX 15,
APP 16
HIT POINTS: 11 ARMOUR: Half Plate (Helm
Off) 1d8
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 101% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 72% 1d3+db
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 71%, Dodge 55%, Insight
55%, Jump 53%, Oratory 59%, Own Language 95%,
Other Language (Low Melnibonéan) 25%, Ride 80%,
Scribe 51%, Swim 40%, Young Kingdoms 41%
INDUSTRIAL QUARTER
This is the poorest and most desperate district of
Old Hrolmar, and extends from the edge of the
sandstone escarpment by the Hrol Falls to the
northern and eastern city walls. Here are
clustered the drab terraces which form the
homes and hovels of the city’s working poor, as
well as their struggling businesses and the
factories, foundries and mills in which they
labour. The recent spread of mechanisation
throughout the district has put many men out of
work, although in some cases their jobs have
been filled by women and children who are
considerably cheaper to employ. Poverty is
increasingly endemic in the Industrial Quarter,
while a new disease, called ‘the Black Lung’, has
begun to claim the lives of both young and old.
Life in the Industrial Quarter is difficult, and
it is not uncommon to see children maimed by
the machinery they once tended behind high
factory walls, begging in the narrow streets.
Overhead, tall chimneys belch smoke and soot
into the air. The air of the Industrial Quarter is
thick with grit that catches in the throat and
brings tears to the eyes. In the months of Elordan
and Sigmursan the prevailing northern winds
blow fumes from the Industrial Quarter across
the city, at which time many of the nobility
retreat to their summer estates outside the city
walls. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 52 -
Only the main streets are paved throughout
the quarter, and after rain the dusty side-streets
turn to a morass of sticky mud. Open drains run
down the middle of every street down to the
river, as the Industrial Quarter is unsewered.
Effluent from the tanneries, butchers and dyeworks
joins domestic waste in the Hrol. Without
such amenities as garbage collection, rubbish
lies in the streets where it is tossed, providing
rich pickings for the many pigs and chickens
owned by most local families, which are turned
out into the streets to forage each day. Their
droppings further add to the stench which
plagues the quarter.
An increasing percentage of the Industrial
Quarter’s residents are foreign-born, which is
causing some unrest in this part of the city.
Immigrants who have fled the Foreign Quarter’s
depravity and squalor have settled here in
increasing numbers, where some among the
older residents accuse them of taking jobs which
should rightfully be filled by Hrolmarians. Others
(who associate all foreigners with the crime of
the Foreign Quarter) accuse the newcomers of
having poor hygiene, low morals and
intrinsically criminal natures.
Despite the conditions under which most
residents live, the folk of the Foreign Quarter
have a certain stubborn pride in their position
and can be generous to a fault, especially in
times of misfortune. It is a point of honour
among several of the district’s families that they
have children in the priesthood or in the ranks of
the Grey Defenders, a tradition that has been
passed down through the generations. The social
heart of the Industrial Quarter is its many
taverns, which serve cheap wines and strong
ales, deadening the senses of its desperate
inhabitants.
Two main types of houses exist in the
Foreign Quarter: individual cottages and rows of
terraces. Unlike buildings elsewhere in the city,
most homes in the Foreign Quarter are
constructed of cheap bricks instead of sandstone.
A typical cottage is a single storey, tworoom
building, standing detached and separate
from its neighbours. Found in the poorest
residences of the Industrial Quarter, these
dwellings typically have broken shutters, unsafe
brick walls, and slate-tiled roofs that leak in even
the lightest rain. It is not uncommon for a family
of ten to live together in such a dwelling, along
with their goat, a pig and a small flock of
chickens, all of which are turned out into the
streets to forage by day.
Terrace houses appear slightly less
depressing. These single storied, four-room
houses are built in rows, and create streets of
identical buildings, which, to strangers, can
become quite confusing. With front doors
opening directly onto the street, most sport a
small garden at the rear. The floors are made of
lose-fitting wooden boards, which in more
desperate times might be ripped up and burned
as firewood. Small shuttered windows at the
front and rear of the house admit little light, and
as a result these homes are cold and dark in
winter and hot and dark in summer. It is not
uncommon for the rear yards to be home to a
chicken coop, goat or pig.
THE BUILDER’S ARMS
A cheap, homely inn that offers space in the
common room for 4 bronze coins a night, a
dormitory bed for 10 bronzes, and one of the
two private rooms for 46 bronzes a night. These
latter rooms are usually unoccupied, as most
visitors who can afford a private room prefer to
stay in a better class of inn. The Builder’s Arms’
has a reputation for being haunted, a matter of
common knowledge in the Industrial Quarter
that also discourages overnight visitors.
In truth the spectral figures occasionally
glimpsed by the inn’s residents and customers
are hypernatural rather than supernatural. The
building stands at a weak point between the
spheres. At certain times of the year, when those
planes closest to the Young Kingdoms are in the
correct alignment, glimpses of these other worlds
and their inhabitants can be seen, thus giving
rise to the ghost stories. Ironically the residents
of these neighbouring planes believe that the
folk of Old Hrolmar, who they sometimes
glimpse flickering in and out of sight, are, in
turn, also ghosts.
A wealthy merchant owns the Builders’
Arms, and he places a considerable burden on
the publican, Ricardo Malcon, to meet monthly
financial targets. At present, with the demands of
the owner outweighingincome, Ricardo fears
that he and the staff he employs will soon be out
of work. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 53 -
CHURCH OF VALLYN
The church of Vallyn is a soot-encrusted
brick hall bearing all the standard features of
Vilmirian architecture. Identifiable by the square
belltower that rises above its roof above the front
door, it is home to the elderly, purple-robed
priest, Father Xavier Arrago. Arrago, whose
reputation is wide reaching, emphasises the
White Lords’ plans for each and every soul in his
sermons, and urges his parishioners to know
their place and serve their part in the social
order.
CORUNA SLAUGHTERHOUSE
This low brick building is just one of many
businesses pouring waste and effluent into the
Hrol River throughout the Industrial Quarter.
Animals sold in New Hrolmar are butchered
here, with wholesalers purchasing the resulting
cuts of meat for their butchers’ shops and stalls.
The constant bellowing of terrified cattle and
other beasts is terrible to hear, and in summer
the stink is overwhelming. The slaughterhouse is
owned by the florid and muscular Guillen
Coruna, the head of the Slaughtermen’s Guild,
and managed by his bad-tempered brother-inlaw
Diego Malcon.
THE ESCARPMENT
At its greatest height the sandstone cliff, which
delineates the southern border of the Industrial
Quarter, is only 20 feet high. The Hrol River
plunges over the cliff here into a turbulent and
polluted pool, before flowing downstream
through the heart of the city to the sea. Local
children dare each other to climb the rock face,
sometimes with tragic results, while in summer
small scuttling lizards bask on the exposed stone
and feed upon the insects attracted by the
occasional hardy plant whose roots have found
purchase in the cliff face.
FESTIVAL HALL
This rundown building hosts regular wrestling
matches for the entertainment of vocal crowds.
The ringmaster and owner is the ambitious and
sleazy Jorivol Ramirez, a florid, loud-voiced and
heavy-set Vilmirian aged in his late 40’s.
Standing room entry costs 1 bronze, and gains
access to the crowded first floor (which is
regularly worked by pickpockets), while 2
bronzes gains access to the second floor,
providing a seated view of the central ring.
Adventurers may be content just to watch a
match, or, if they wish, look to take part in a
wrestling match themselves. Every night, as a
break during the scheduled proceedings, a
challenger from the crowd risks limb and pride
against the house champion for a prize of 50
bronzes. Jorivol recently banned local boy Lucan
Frenaro (see the entry on the Martinez Foundry
below for more details on Lucan) from entering
again, as he has won the prize too many times.
TAKI KANUTA
EXILED PIKARAYDIAN AND WRESTLING
CHAMPION, AGE 30
This hulking, powerfully built warrior is exiled from his
own land as a result of a complex internecine feud. His
rippling musculature and broad face are inked with
complex tribal tattoos, while his thick black hair is
cropped short. When wrestling Taki is a terrifying sight,
his skin greased with pig fat, his eyes bulging, and his
face contorted as he roars obscenities at his challangers.
Outside of the ring he drinks heavily and broods over his
past.
CHAOS 22, BALANCE 19, LAW 11
STR 18, CON 16, SIZ 17, INT 12, POW 14, DEX 15,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 17 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Greatsword 88% 2d8+db
Wrestle 110% special
Brawl 115% 1d3+db
SKILLS: Nightmares 105%, Wake Screaming 90%, Young
Kingdoms 44%
THE HAWK AND SERPENT
The Hawk and Serpent tavern offers fresh, simple
fare and cheap wines and ales. It does not
officially provide accommodation, although the
owner will allow travellers to sleep on the
taproom floor for 4 bronze coins a night. (Of
course, upon awakening, most visitors discover
that their purses have been stolen.)
A local gang, the Church Street Boys, loiters
at this tavern when they are not out causing
trouble. The majority of the gang are idle young
men content with the occasional fistfight and a
night spent carousing. However their leader, the
innkeeper’s good-for-nothing brother who has
recently returned from a stretch in the prison
hulks in Uhaio harbour, is of a more dangerous
frame of mind. Under his guidance the gang 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 54 -
have developed a serious dislike of foreigners,
and woe beside anyone with a strange accent
who wanders into the bar of the Hawk and
Serpent when the Church Street Boys are
drinking here.
ARNAO BELZADINE
INNKEEPER & FENCE, AGE 41
The landlord of the Hawk and Serpent runs a highly
profitable secondary business in the sale of stolen goods.
He originally encouraged the Church Street Boys to drink
here under the assumption that they would provide him
with protection from anyone trying to muscle in on his
turf, but lately he has begun trying to determine how he
can make a profit from their new campaign of
intimidating and bashing foreigners. Elsa, his sallowfaced
wife, assists Arnao in running the inn, spending
most of the time avoiding her husband’s cruel temper.
CHAOS 31, BALANCE 09, LAW 15
STR 13, CON 15, SIZ 13, INT 12, POW 10, DEX 13,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Large Club 75% 1d8+1+db
Butcher Knife 70% 1d6+db
Burning Torch 65% 1d6 (flame)
SKILLS: Bargain 85%, Conceal Object 90%, Evaluate
80%, Fast Talk 65%, Insight 55%, Line Own Pockets 85%,
Listen 70%, Young Kingdoms 38%
PATRO BELZADRINE
LEADER OF THE CHURCH STREET BOYS,
AGE 23
Arnao’s shiftless younger brother was imprisoned in
Uhaio last year after a drunken assault on an officer of the
Vilmirian navy. He returned from his six-month spell on
the prison hulks a changed man: violent and full of hate.
He refuses to say what happened to him while he was
imprisoned, and he almost killed the last man who tried
to discuss it. Since his return, Patro has manifested a
venomous loathing for anyone who is not from Old
Hrolmar, and when drunk, can be heard bitterly
denouncing the ‘mongrel hordes whose presence is
encouraged by our duke’s lax rule’. Under his renewed
leadership, the Church Street Boys have begun to bully
foreigners in the Industrial Quarter, and within a few
months, their campaign will begin to attract new
converts as unemployment spreads (see the HROLMARLIAN
DIGEST for statistics for the rank and file members of the
Church Street Boys).
CHAOS 25, BALANCE 17, LAW 21
STR 15, CON 14, SIZ 16, INT 11, POW 13, DEX 16,
APP 13 HP 15
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: Soft Leather (Helm
Off) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 80% 1d3+db
Shortsword 75% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 70% 1d4+1+db
SKILLS: Climb 65%, Conceal Object 70%, Disguise 45%,
Dodge 60%, Hide 56%, Hate Foreigners 95%, Insight
75%, Oratory 80%
THE HOUSE OF PEACE
White-robed priests of Mirath serve in this
hospice, tending to the sick, of which there are
many. In recent years a mysterious ailment has
begun to trouble the poor of the Industrial
Quarter, with new victims claimed every year.
The onset of the disease, now called ‘the Black
Lung’, is initially signified by a shortness of
breath, a symptom that soon leads to fits and the
sick coughing of a black, choking phlegm.
Victims face a slow death as eventually their
lungs fill up with the black muck, and they
suffocate. The most horrifying aspect of Black
Lung is that it can take weeks, or even months,
of misery before Mirath claims them.
MARTINEZ FOUNDRY
Owned by the merchant Pedro Martinez, this
local business manufactures copper and cast iron
for the city’s tradesmen. It is an inferno of
clanging hammers and glowing coals, flying
sparks, heat and noise.
LUCAN FRENARO
WRESTLER & FOUNDRY-WORKER, AGE 21
This powerfully built but sweet-natured young man is fast
developing a reputation as the strongest man in Old
Hrolmar, especially after he single-handedly lifted a
collapsed wagon off a pinned carter a month ago. This
situation, however, brings him more grief than joy, as
drunken bullies have begun to seek him out. Lucan has a
shy grin and square, handsome features fringed by a soft
beard. More than one young lady has already lost their
heart to him, although he is socially awkward where the
opposite sex is concerned.
CHAOS 13, BALANCE 17, LAW 21
STR 19, CON 18, SIZ 19, INT 13, POW 12, DEX 16,
APP 14 HP 19
HIT POINTS: 19 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 80% 1d3+db
Wrestle 120% special
Sledgehammer 75% 1d8+2+db
SKILLS: Blush at Compliment 90%, Craft (Metalworking)
65%, Dodge 50%, Evaluate 30%, Insight 50%, Throw 65%
PERUCHO BRICKWORKS
This extensive building on By-The-Wall-Street is
where many of the bricks used in construction in 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 55 -
Old Hrolmar’s building are shaped and baked.
Remero Perucho is the owner, a beefy man with
an ample stomach and stupendously bushy
eyebrows, which, like his beard and hair, are
always flecked with dust and plaster. An
enormous bee hive-shaped downdraft kiln stands
at the heart of the brickworks, and a 50-foot high
chimney belches out smoke and grit over the
city.
SWEETWATER WELL
Given the polluted nature of the Hrol, which is
barely drinkable once it enters the city walls,
many within the district take their water from this
westside well. It is a centre for local gossip, with
housewives and children swapping tales and
news as they wait their turn to fill buckets and
pitchers.
VADRIGAL COTTON MILL
This three-storey cotton mill stands on the banks
of the Hrol immediately above the falls. Owned
by the family of Vilmiro’s Duke Nogion, the mill
is typical of many of the factories in the district.
Having recently had a new system of
mechanised looms installed, it has forced many
local weavers out of work. Count Zamoro
Vadrigal, the owner’s son, moved to Old
Hrolmar last year to supervise the installation of
the new technology and oversee an increase in
productivity. His office is located on the mill’s
top floor.
The new, water driven mechanised looms
are run by a complicated system of gears and
pulleys. The rumble and creak of the slowly
turning mill wheel powering the machines never
stop. Other mills in the area grind corn or run
mechanised bellows to heat their furnaces
through similar technology.
VILCHEZ TANNERY
Standing on the western shore of the Hrol, within
earshot of the falls, is a noisome tannery owned
by Vil Vilchez, a grim and religious man who
habitually dresses in dark and severe clothing.
This is one of several tanneries in the district
that, together with the nearby dyeworks and
slaughterhouses, contribute to the noxious
atmosphere of the Industrial Quarter.
THE WEALTH OF GOLDAR
This tavern has recently been taken over by a
displaced family of refugees, once-wealthy
farmers from the neighbouring duchy of
Rignariom who were driven off their lands by the
ever-expanding Dinner-of-Dust, a large desert,
which grows larger every summer (see The Atlas
of the Young Kingdoms Volume One: The
Northern Continent for more details). Santiago
Regardus and his family are attempting to turn
the tavern’s fortunes around, although their
efforts are hindered by harassment from the
ruffians who drink at the nearby Hawk and
Serpent Tavern (see the Hawk and Serpent above
for more details). At present the gang members
content themselves with verbal threats and the
occasional bar brawl, but in the coming months
their harassment will escalate as popular
sentiment turns against the district’s latest
arrivals.
MERCHANTS’ QUARTER
Old Hrolmar’s mercantile district extends from
the South Gate into the very heart of the city. At
its northern end stands the glittering glass
Pyramid of Law, rising from among the tree-lined
avenues, the carefully tended turf and the
reflective pools of Serenity Park. Adjacent to the
park, beside the river, construction work is
presently underway upon the new Zoological
Gardens, whose exhibits will eventually include
many of the wonders of the natural world.
The majority of the businesses in the
Merchant’s Quarter are clustered together by
trade, in locations that include Threadneedle
Street (dominated by tailors and dressmakers),
Bakers’ Street, and Scribe Street. The busiest
thoroughfare is Setsquare Street, given over to
architects and masons, where columns and
cornices, balconies and finials adorn once
blandly uniform buildings. Colourful canvas
awnings overhang the district’s streets, shading
the multitude of goods on sale and the bustling
crowds.
Astrology, alchemy, philosophy and physik
are among the more arcane trades practised in
the Merchants’ Quarter, while the Young
Kingdom’s oldest art is practiced in Rose Street,
where most ‘tastes’ are catered for. Even Duke
Avan is an occasional discrete visitor to
Cleveland House in Rose Street. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 56 -
Several private galleries are found in the
mercantile district, catering to the increasingly
daring tastes of the nobility, and representing
some of the many exciting young artists who
have flocked to Old Hrolmar in recent years.
Prices vary throughout the Merchant’s
Quarter, but vendors who over-inflate their costs
rarely last long, such is the level of competition
in the city.
On Valario Street, the main street running
from the Harbour Gate to the Pyramid of Law,
stands the grand bazaar, which occupies all
three storeys of an old sandstone building, as
well as its cellars. Here, the halls echo with the
cries of vendors competing with one another to
offer the best bargains on both local produce
and goods from across the Young Kingdoms. A
labour market can be found on the first floor,
where hopeful men and women apply for
employment ranging from bodyguard to scullerymaid,
and lady-in-waiting to alchemist’s
assistant.
Off the main streets lie the residences of the
town’s merchants and tradesmen, and also Old
Hrolmar’s grand guildhouse, a veritable palace
of the workers, which takes up almost an entire
city block. The districts less successful businesses
are clustered in the northwest corner of the
quarter, forced to do business on the fringes of
the Shadow City.
BAKER STREET
Redolent with the scents of fresh bread and other
baked goods, Baker Street is home to many local
bakeries, each fiercely competing with their
neighbours. As well as selling such staples as
bread and savoury pastries, a number of
businesses in Baker Street have begun to
diversify their wares to suit the tastes of the city’s
many recent immigrants.
• Ida’s Pie Shop - Run by the rosy-cheeked Ida
Timotea, a widow with five hungry children
to support, this popular business sells a
range of freshly baked pies, including apple,
peppered fish, and meat pies. There is no
truth in the rumour, spread by a jealous
competitor, that Ida puts dog meat in her
pies.
• Dassom’s Baked Goods - The perennially
flour-covered Berto Dassom and his rosycheeked
wife run this bakery. They are
among the earliest risers in the city, and
more than once they have witnessed events
that they shudder to recall. Members of the
Grey Defenders drop by Berto’s shop
periodically to ask if the couple has seen this
or that suspect about on the streets at an
hour when most honest people are still in
their beds, rewarding the Dassoms with a
handful of coins for any information they
can provide.
BATHHOUSE
The bathhouse offers clean bathing facilities and
dry towels for the price of 2 bronze coins per
visit. There are hot and cold baths on offer, as
well as a steam room where tired adventures
may ease their bruises and aching muscles. In
addition, talented slaves are on call to provide
therapeutic massages for another bronze coin.
The bathhouse is one of the few places in Old
Hrolmar where citizens can rub shoulders
regardless of social rank.
Out of sight, in the cavernous cellars
beneath the building, great furnaces heat the
water for the hot baths while vents pipe the
steam to the steam room. One of the staff, the
elderly but spry Agostion Corunna, is a member
of the cult of Slortar, and on more than one
occasion has disposed of a body in these
furnaces at the request of his fellow cultists. (See
PLOTS AND POWERS for more details about the
activities of the Cult of Slortar.)
BROKEN-BONE STREET
This street gains its name from the number of
barbers, tooth-pullers, bonesetters, herbalists,
physicians and quacks who ply their trades here.
It is not a popular location amongst the city’s
citizens, but one that is still well-attended.
JOZEL OF CADSANDRIA
HEALER, AGED 50
This elderly woman was trained in the healing arts at the
University of Cadsandria, and has attracted a large and
loyal following since setting up shop in Old Hrolmar. She
is a worshipper of Maluk of Chaos, a god of knowledge,
although since coming to Vilmir four years ago she has
been at pains to keep this allegiance hidden. Jozel has
recently discovered a rare herb, native to the Weeping
Waste, that is remarkably efficacious in curing diseases of
the lungs.
Unsurprisingly, with the outbreak of Black Lung in the
Industrial Quarter, the herb is in high demand (especially
as Jozel has tried to ensure that the curative is affordable
to all who need it) and now her supplies of the dried 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 57 -
herb are running low. Perhaps the adventures are the
brave fellows she seeks to travel to the Weeping Waste
to gather a fresh supply for her?
NOTABLE SKILLS: Botany 80%, Physik 105%, Young
Kingdoms 56%
ALVARO DORIGAS
QUACK, AGE 53
This self-proclaimed Doctor of Physik has no
qualifications, and has learned most of his skills through
trial and error. From his small practise he watches his
neighbour Jozel’s thriving business with jealous eyes.
Alvaro knows that the worship of Chaos is common in
Argimiliar, and hopes to be able to accuse Jozel of heresy
in order eliminate her as competition. To date he has had
no success beyond spreading gossip, but Alvaro soon
hopes to be able to hire a thief to break into his
neighbour’s house and unearth evidence of Jozel’s
heinous Chaos-worship. He will not hesitate to hire the
adventurers if he thinks they are capable of assisting him.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Jealousy 100%, Physik 45%
BUILDING SITE
This corner block is a wasteland of churned
mud, scaffolding, flapping canvas and heaped
bricks. The building that was to be erected here
has been abandoned and the labourers have
been laid off following the owner’s recent death.
Local gossips may mention that the site has lain
empty for as long as they can remember, and
that any construction that does get under way
here always ends in disarray. Whether this is
because of bad luck or is perhaps due to some
sleeping supernatural force entombed below is
for the Gamemaster to explore.
COLLEGIUM
This baroque building is still under construction,
but when it is finished its domed roof will echo
with the wisdom of the ages. A personal project
of the duke, the collegium is intended to rival
the University of Cadsandria as a seat for
learning. Once open it will offer classes in
mathematics, music, oratory, rhetoric, astronomy
and similar subjects, with tutors drawn from the
four corners of the Young Kingdoms. It is still
almost a year away from completion, and after
the duke’s death it will be closed, only to open a
short time later as a religious school instructing
young acolytes in the strictures and liturgies of
the Church of Law.
HOSET THE YOUNGER
PHILOSOPHER, AGE 60
This grey-bearded Argimilian was previously a faculty
member of the University of Cadsandria, but resigned
that post after Duke Avan invited him to take up the
position of Dean at Old Hrolmar’s Collegium. Hoset has
lived in the city for almost a year now, dwelling in a
cluttered set of rooms on the fourth floor of a well-kept
Scribe Street house, where he gives private lessons,
drafts curricula, and corresponds with some of the best
minds in the Young Kingdoms. He dreams of founding a
house of learning where wisdom is held in greater
esteem than birthright, and logic and erudition are
valued more than gold. His wit and wisdom are held in
high repute, and he regularly advises the duke on
matters of state.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Million Spheres 09%, Natural World
55%, Oratory 95%, Young Kingdoms 72%
FUTURE-MADE-PLAIN STREET
Astrologers, soothsayers, fakes and fortunetellers
ply their trades in Future-Made-Plain Street,
providing every possible forecast of a person’s
fate, from a simple palm reading to an intricately
detailed horoscope. Their crafts are tolerated in
some quarters, patronised by some, and look
upon with dread by others. The Church of Law
regards all of them suspiciously.
MADAME JEMMA MONFERRIZ
 SERVANT OF THE BALANCE, AGE
INDETERMINATE
This wizened old lady is a devoted servant of the Cosmic
Balance, a rare enough trait in anyone let alone a
Vilmirian. Having travelled widely in her youth, Jemma
stumbled across Tanelorn and lived there peacefully for
many years, until the man she loved was killed in a battle
to repel the forces of Chaos during one of their periodic
strikes against the city. Thereafter she departed the
Eternal City and returned to Vilmir. Now she waits for
other potential champions of the Balance to visit her, and
while telling their fortunes, offers clues and portents to
nudge them towards their true fate.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Detect Balance 105%, Foretell Future
95%
LADY YOLANDA KARADAN
ASTROLOGER, AGE 39
This haughty Jharkorian astrologer holds considerable
influence in Old Hrolmar, as her regular clients include
various young nobles and the wives, mistresses and
catamites of several leading merchants and guildsmen.
Her predictions are given great weight, and so she
shapes the lives of many, as well as being a confidante in
whom her clients can entrust their fears and cares. Lady
Yolanda is manipulative, shrewd and confident in the
accuracy of her predictions; given the nature of her fees,
she is also extremely comfortable. She wears her waistlength
hair unbound and scented with rich oils, although
her vanity demands regular applications of black dye to
cover up the streaks of grey which age has threaded
through her locks. Yolanda dresses in gowns of rustling
silk, and while her features are too strong to be called
beautiful, she is a handsome woman.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Astrology 89%, Insight 88%
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 58 -
GRAND BAZAAR
Old Hrolmar’s Grand Bazaar is a temple to
mercantile endeavour. More than 100 merchants
operate out of the building. It is a lofty, threestorey
sandstone warehouse occupying an entire
city block. On each side of the building, a short
flight of steps leads from the street up to a
portico lined with squat pillars and high arches,
from which great double doors open into the
bazaar proper. “I’ll meet you under the arches”
is a common Hrolmarlian expression, and refers
to the popular meeting place at the Grand
Bazaar, on the top of the steps beneath the
arches of the portico. Friends, lovers, merchants
and just about anyone else can be seen lounging
here at all hours of the day, scanning the streets
for the faces of their friends who they have
arranged to meet here.
The first floor of the bazaar is given over to
fresh produce, including grains, meats and
greens. Other stalls sell cages of pigeons,
nervous hens and live rabbits. While some
fishmongers operate out of the first floor of the
bazaar, most are to be found at the larger fish
markets in nearby Quayside. Those wishing to
buy larger animals for food or farming are best
advised to seek out New Hrolmar’s busy
stockyards.
The building’s second floor is occupied
predominantly by sellers of fabric, bed linen and
clothing, while the third floor is given over to
stalls selling trinkets, antiques, and other
oddments ranging from thimbles and thread to
kitchenware. Even the basement is used for
trading: here are stored kegs of wine, piles of
coal, sacks of potatoes and similar goods.
MADAM GALENA REGALARRDO
ANTIQUE DEALER, AGE INDETERMINATE
Madam Regalarrdo is an elderly-seeming woman of
indeterminate age, with wise eyes and smooth skin
framed by snow-white hair (although in truth she is aged
in her early 30’s, and dyes her hair so as to appear older
and more mysterious). Her stall, located on the third
floor of the bazaar, specialises in antiquities, especially
scrolls and manuscripts. She is not choosy about her
clientele, at least one of whom is a necromancer, and,
although she charges a high price for her services, with
her range of contacts she is able to source almost any
manuscript ever written or printed in the Young
Kingdoms. The shelves and tables in her shop are
crowded with candlesticks, fine earthernware, objects
d’art and other old and rare goods aimed at the
discerning buyer. Madam Galena gives Duke Avan first
rights to purchase any item of Melnibonéan origin that
comes into her hands, as his passion for the Dragon Isle’s
arts are well known to her.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Bargain 93%, History 76%
TITO CORUNNA
APOTHECARY, AGE 34
Tito Corunna is a tall, gaunt gentleman whose reputation
for servility is well known in the bazaar. He bows so
deeply when greeting customers that he appears almost
boneless. His voice is thin, his eyes deep-set and
feverish, and his conversation rapid. He is also extremely
paranoid. As well as being an excellent apothecary and
practitioner of the arts physik, Tito is also an adept
poisoner, although his excellence in this trade is not
widely known. Women who need to rid themselves of
brutal and drunken husbands are known to whisper of his
reputation, while the local branch of the Mereghn (the
Ilmioran assassins’ guild) also employ his services. If the
adventurers spend too much time in the vicinity of his
first floor stall Tito may grow suspicious of their motives
and flee. Alternatively he may seek to offer them a glass
of wine laced with a slow-acting poison, which will not
take effect for several days, or even weeks, in order to
remove any possible threat the adventurers’ pose to his
livelihood.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Natural World 47%, Physik 86%,
Potions 81%
BELTRAN HEREBRA
FISHMONGER, AGE 40
A short, rotund and ridiculously cheerful fishmonger
operating out of the first floor of the bazaar, Beltran
Herebra is is always one of the first merchants to make
their way to the Quayside markets in the morning.
Consequently his wares are always fresh and of the finest
quality. Although his prices are slightly higher than those
of his Quayside peers, his produce has the advantage of
being already gutted, scaled and filleted for the
convenience of his customers. Beltrain’s stall is easily
located by his constant spruiking and through the sound
of endlessly sharpening knives. His flashing blades dance
before visitors and clients, sending scales sparkling and
fish heads leaping to the sawdust covered floor. Last
week Beltran cut open a shark to discover the heavily
tattooed arm of a missing criminal in its guts; who knows
what he will find while the adventurers are passing by?
NOTABLE SKILLS: Craft (Rope) 64%, Listen 68%,
Sailing 72%
LEMILLIA REMATI
HERBALIST, AGE 28
Dark-haired, dark eyed Lemillia Remati is the oldest
daughter of an Ilmioran merchant, fathered upon a
woman of the Weeping Waste. Although raised in
Ilmiora, her mother has instructed her well, which has
resulted in Lemillia developing into an extremely
successful healer. Her stall is festooned with dried herbs
and roots of all descriptions, from which she can brew up
a potion or a poultice for almost any occasion. Of late
Lemillia has been approached more than once by Old
Hrolmar’s smugglers to sell their illegal wares in her
shop, but so far has declined their offers. Unfortunately,
their threats grow progressively severe and she is unsure
how much longer she can hold out.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Natural World 94%, Physik 63%,
Potions 93%
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 59 -
THE LABOUR MARKET
Located on the bustling first floor, towards the
rear of the bazaar, this office advertises an array
of jobs available for visitors and residents of Old
Hrolmar alike every day. Everything from maid
to mercenary, caravan guard to nanny are
advertised here, although given that most folk
cannot read, a small number of criers are
employed to spruik the jobs on offer three times
a day. Adventurers seeking employment in Old
Hrolmar will be advised to visit here before
looking anywhere else, unless they are seeking
employment of a less legal nature.
GUILDHOUSE
This baroque and fanciful building, with its
grand central dome, many-pillared facade,
balustrades and cornices, is home to most of Old
Hrolmar’s guilds, even though it is only halfcomplete
and still swathed in scaffolding..
Membership of a guild is only open to those who
practise a craft or trade: merchants are forced to
join their own, separate association, and
significant rivalry exists between the two (see
PLOTS AND POWERS for details). The various craft
guilds regulate the quality, working hours and
conditions of its members. Their power is
absolute, enforced by cudgel-wielding labourers,
and no tradesman who flouts their authority lasts
long in the city.
There are three ranks within the guild
system: masters (who own their own businesses),
journeymen (one or more of who serve under a
master until such time as they maybe deemed
skilful enough to become masters themselves)
and apprentices (who are indentured to a master
for a period of three to seven years, often
sleeping under their master’s roof until they are
raised to journeyman status).
The constant feuding between various
guilds is played out in the Guildhouse, during
interminable meetings that last late into the
night. Artisans and tradespersons who are
newcomers to Old Hrolmar are expected to
register themselves here, and pay an annual
membership of 5 bronze coins to their relevant
guild, before accepting any work (although there
are numerous employers in the city willing to
turn an eye to non-guild labour, while certain of
the guilds are indisposed to accept foreign
labour least it endangers their local members’
business).
Under Duke Avan’s rule the guildmasters
have become extremely wealthy and influential,
although they have found most of the city’s
nobility have closed ranks against them,
restricting their access to certain social circles.
Currently the most influential guilds are the
stonecutters, masons, architects and surveyors
guilds, although other guilds (including the
weavers, furriers, and bricklayers) have more
members and can be heard complaining over
glasses of wine in the nearby taverns about the
inequities of the labour market and the fickle
nature of public recognition for their work.
THE HOUSE ON ARMOURY ROW
Among the many armourers whose businesses
give this street its name stands this empty house.
Until recently it was the home of Luis Fornova,
one of the best shield-makers in the city. After
his wife ran away with a tinker last year, Luis put
the house on the market, and moved a few
blocks away, to a grander house on Valario
Street. He is now in the process of arranging,
through the Church of Law, to have his wife
divorced for abandonment, and plans to marry
his old neighbour’s eldest daughter, Aliza, once
the divorce is approved.
The house’s new owner is the miserly tailor
Calvan Zagosa, who has put the fully-furnished
house up for rent at a surprisingly cheap 70
bronze/week. Zagosa is forced to offer the house
so cheaply due to the fact that all the previous
occupants have moved out after only a few short
weeks of moving in, due to the building being
haunted
The truth of the matter is that Luis Fornova
was conducting an illicit affair with Aliza Mulay,
and last year murdered his wife Isahble so that
he would be free to remarry. Isahble’s body is
currently buried beneath the kitchen floor and it
is her spirit that haunts the premises.
If the adventurers move into the house on
Armoury Row they will soon discover that
rumours of it being haunted have not been
exaggerated. Doors refuse to stay closed, or
close by themselves if left open. Shutters bang on
still days, cold breezes spring up from nowhere,
and at night the sound of weeping can be heard
emanating from the empty kitchen. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 60 -
ISAHBLE FORNOVA
GHOST, APPARENT AGE 26
Should events lead the adventurers to discover Isahble’s
corpse where it rots beneath the kitchen’s slate floor, it
will not take long before the body’s lustrous red hair
helps identify it as that of Fornova’s missing wife - the
caved-in skull is a clear indication of the cause of death..
Once the body has been properly buried, and Luis
Fornova has been arrested for murder, the ghost will be
able to rest.
POW 11, DEX 10, MOV 8 (DRIFT), HP N/A
ARMOUR: Cannot Be Touched
ABILITIES: Telekinesis 80% (1 MP per siz of the object
moved)
SKILLS: Create Unearthly Chill 85%, Lust For Vengeance
100%, Moan Despairingly 100%
THE KING'S HEAD INN
Located on Market Street near the Grand Bazaar,
the King’s Head is reputedly the best commercial
establishment in Old Hrolmar. The arrogant
owner, Nogion Savastion, changes 20 bronze
coins per night for a dormitory bed, and 50 for a
private room. Only the best wines and foods are
served here, and the chef, originally from the
duchy of Rignariom, is Filkharian-trained. The
foppish young Earl Eduardo Astran and his
cronies drink here regularly.
LANTERN STREET
This narrow street predominantly houses candlemakers
and merchants who specialise in selling
lantern oil and related goods. It is also home to a
fugitive from the Ilmioran city-state ofGaleazzo,
whose presence is a closely guarded secret.
KARLO FORLI
GLASSBLOWER, AGE 36
Karlo Forli is a thin, frightened man of rare skill and
talent. One of Galeazzo’s best glassblowers, he wearied
of being kept under virtual house arrest in his own citystate,
and engineered his escape just over a year ago.
Sadly, Ilmiora’s Senator Tintoreo and the Galeazzean
Glassblowers’ guild are intent on recovering what they
see as their rightful property: the traditional skills that
Forli possesses.
Having fled the city-state in order to be able to freely
practise his craft, Forli is now too frightened to do so, in
case it alerts those who pursue him. Never able to settle
down for long, the harried Ilmioran is currently working
as a wick-spinner in a small Lantern Street business and
constantly looking over his shoulder.
If the Galeazzean bounty hunters who have been hired to
track him down ever discover him, Forli will be forcibly
abducted and returned to his home in chains.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Craft (Glassblowing) 111%
MERCHANT’S ASSOCIATION
The headquarters of the merchants’ association
(who regulate prices, quality, weights and
measures of all goods in Old Hrolmar, in
addition to their member’s business practices) on
Valario Street is partially shrouded by scaffolding
as it is currently being renovated. The merchants’
association includes importers, grocers and other
market-sellers, and while they are not yet as
powerful as the guilds, their influence increases
steadily in correspondence with their fortunes.
The city’s most successful merchants are
already as rich as minor nobles, although, again
like their guild ‘cousins’, Vilmir’s rigid class
structure has thus far mostly prevented them
from ascending through the city’s social strata.
There is a significant and bitter feud between the
merchant’s association and the trade guilds, with
the two organisations constantly jockeying for
position and influence in the city. United, they
would be a considerable political force.
ROSE STREET
The majority of businesses along this narrow side
street are devoted to the world’s oldest
profession, prostitution. Brothels catering to most
acceptable tastes, and even those that are not,
can be found here. They range from the good to
the elegant (poorer purses are catered for in the
fleshpots of the Foreign Quarter and New
Hrolmar), and include The Cock House (whose
street sign depicts a crowing rooster), The Arbor,
the popular The Sailor’s Rest, and the littleknown
Cleveland House (a brothel for men who
prefer masculine company, located in a narrow
laneway off Rose Street proper).
MISTRESS FELISSA FORTUNATA
MADAM, AGE 51
Mistress Felissa is the most successful madam in Rose
Street. She operates three large brothels, including The
Sailor’s Rest, although although the law forbids her from
owning them outright. Beneath her ample bosom and
welcoming smile beats the cold heart of a ruthless
businesswoman, as long ago Felissa realised that the only
power open to a woman in Vilmir comes through men.
To this end she has ensured that she takes notes on
every man of wealth and influence who walks through
the door of her establishments, while her girls are trained
to remember their pillow talk and report anything of
import back to her. In this way she has gained influence
over a number of the city’s most influential men, all of
whom have been are forced to acquiesce to her
demands, least she expose their secrets and ruin them.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Art (Seduction) 78%, Evaluate 94%,
Insight 85%, Listen 91%, Move Quietly 80%
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 61 -
SCRIBE STREET
This short street is lined with stalls and
businesses selling the ingredients for ink, quills,
blank parchments as well as the expertise and
skills of the many scribes who work and reside
here. Its residents also include the influential
Argimilarian philosopher Hoset the Younger and
several minor poets. The city’s illiterate come to
Scribe Street when they need letters dictated or
advice on the writing of leases, wills and other
legal documents. In recent years Old Hrolmar’s
scribes have a new and vigorous feud with the
residents of Printers’ Street, who they claim are
unfairly poaching their business.
GARLON ARRADO
SCRIBE, AGE 42
A pleasantly spoken, shaven-headed gentleman, Garlon
charges a standard price for his services: 5 bronzes per
page of text he is employed to write, and 3 bronzes to
read a letter or other document aloud. Some of his
customers dictate their letters to him; others hire him to
make copies of existing documents. He is renowned for
his discretion as much for his elegant calligraphy.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Keep Secrets 90%, Own Language
95%, Other Language (Low Melnibonéan) 27%, Scribe
102%, Young Kingdoms 55%
ASTIK OF NARGESSER
PAN TANGIAN SPY, AGE 36
This swarthy, bearded fellow passes himself off as a
Dharijorian scribe and an expert in Vilmirian common
law. While he does indeed possess such skills, he has
studied them in order to better serve his secret master,
the Theocrat of Pan Tang. Astik is the illegitimate son of a
Pan Tangian sorcerer, fathered upon a minor Dharijorian
noblewoman. He has served as the eyes and ears of the
Demon Isle in Jadmar for many years, and six months ago
he journeyed to Old Hrolmar in order to determine if the
city is ripe for exploitation by Pan Tang and its Theocrat.
To date Astik has been content to gather information
about the city and its people, with his role as a scribe
providing him with the perfect cover for asking endless
questions, but it will not be long before he moves to
disrupt and unsettle the city’s daily life.
Astik lives above his shop in Scribe Street. Among his
possessions is a Mabden grimoire given to him by his
father, while a small, portable shrine to Maluk (the Silent
Watcher, a Duke of Entropy whose worship is little
known outside Pan Tang) is hidden away beneath his
bed.
CHAOS 51, BALANCE 12, LAW 19
STR 13, CON 10, SIZ 9, INT 15, POW 17, DEX 14,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 10 ARMOUR: Heavy Robes 1D3-1
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Falchion (Demon) 80% 1d6+2+db+3d10
Dagger 70% 1d4+2+db
SPELLS: Buzzard Eyes (1), Hell’s Armour (1-4), Midnight
(1), Rat Vision (1), Summon Demon (1), Undo Magic (1-
4), Visage of Arioch (1-3), Witch Sight (3)
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: Two Bound Demons,
Breeds Bal’boost and Federax
SKILLS: Bargain 70%, Disguise 55%, Dodge 50%, Insight
40%, Other Language (Low Melnibonéan) 60%, Other
Language (Mabden) 65%, Scribe 85%, Young Kingdoms
45%
KALAZAN
DEMON FALCHION
This scimitar (Breed Bal’boost) appears as a glittering
blade of blue-black crystal with a gleaming blade. Its hilt
is carved of obsidian bound with crimson leather. A
Chaos symbol is engraved upon the base of the blade,
and is only visible once the weapon is drawn.
INT 11, POW 21
ABILITY: Demon Weapon, Adds 3d10 Damage
SQ’RAL’RANN
DEMON MESSENGER
This vile demon (Breed Federax) looks like a shrunken,
leathery head sprouting a pair of bat wings. Its mouth
constantly oozes a dusty fluid. It can fly messages to
locations within a 10-mile radius, or by teleporting, to
locations anywhere on this or a neighbouring plane. In
this manner its master delivers important messages back
to Pan Tang.
STR 4, CON 24, SIZ 3, INT 14, POW 18, DEX 17
HIT POINTS: 14 MOVE: Scuttle 12/Fly 9
DAMAGE BONUS: -1D4
ABILITIES: Teleport, Teleports Self, Each Trip Costs
Demon 1 Con; Wings, Fly At 50 Mph, Carry Up To Half
Str In Siz
SKILLS: Common Tongue 85%, Dodge 70%, Own Plane
50%, Young Kingdoms 20%
NEED: Drink human blood once per week (usually the
binder’s own)
SERENITY PARK
A block from the banks of the Hrol, this tranquil
park is the last visible remnant of the ancient
Melnibonéan estate that Old Hrolmar stands
upon. The bulk of the park consists of perfectly
manicured turf, spreading oak trees and orderly,
unimaginative garden beds tended by a small
army of gardeners. Dotted about the park are a
number of reflective pools, the largest of which
is located in the exact centre of the gardens. In
the middle of this pool stands an imposing white
marble statue of Vil Valario, the liberator of
Vilmir, while on its north bank stands an ancient
magnolia tree, its roots nurtured by longforgotten
magicks percolated deep into the soil
over past millennia. It is whispered that those 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 62 -
who sleep beneath the tree or with the tree’s
blossoms in their houses are reputed to have
strange and prophetic dreams.
The Hilltown botanist Viscount Mendo
Ferrand is a common visitor to Serenity Park, as
are; young lovers who gaze rapturously into
each other’s eyes (under the watchful gaze of
chaperones of course), poets seeking inspiration,
and visitors from far-off lands. The stained glass
Pyramid of Law rises up over the trees, and in
mid-afternoon streams of sunlight shine through
its walls, casting technicoloured pools of light
across the park’s benches and lawns.
A section of land at the park’s southern end
is currently being developed for a planned
zoological garden, the duke’s latest brainchild.
Only the first foundations have been dug so far,
with the exhibitions not planned to open until
4003 YK, by which time Duke Avan will
unfortunately already be dead.
THE SEVEN STARS INN
This popular watering hole, and is owned by an
expatriate Purple Townswoman, Magda
Flamehair, a broad-hipped and jocular woman
aged in her early 40’s. She is also the cook, and
serves hearty, wholesome seafood-based meals
every night to those who can afford her fare.
Accommodation here is comfortable but not
cheap: 6 bronzes a night for floorspace near the
fire, 16 bronzes for a dorm room, and 48 for a
private room.
Magda Flamehair’s pride and joy is an
enchanted chess set, a marvellous synthesis of
magic combined with Lawful engineering, which
Magda inherited when she took over the title of
the Seven Stars. A complex series of wheels and
gears ensure that the white pieces are capable of
moving themselves across the board, which
coupled with a powerful enchantment of
unknown origin, ensures that the pieces seem to
be able to read the passage of play and respond
in an appropriate manner.
Every night sees a small crowd gathered at
the Seven Stars to watch this marvellous chess
set in action, and the line of players prepared to
challenge it. Although gambling on games of
chance is technically illegal in Vilmir, wagers
can be placed with the barman, the heavily
bearded and broad-shouldered Fodric Fornova, a
native Hrolmarlian.
SILVER STREET
So named because of the large number of
silversmiths and jewellers whose businesses are
clustered along this narrow thoroughfare, Silver
Street is regularly patrolled by the Grey
Defenders.
ZAGOSA’S JEWELLERY EMPORIUM
The shop of Rogelio Zagosa, master jeweller, is
located on the corner of Valario Street and Silver
Street. To all intents and purposes the tall, plump
and pale Zagosa is a successful merchant who
specialises in fine jewellery and precious stones.
He is actually one of the least reputable
merchants in Old Hrolmar, and is well known
among the city’s criminal element for accepting
stolen goods. As is usual in the Young Kingdoms,
the only gems in the establishment to have been
cut are of Melnibonéan origin; otherwise they
are simply polished and mounted. Visitors to
Zagosa’s shop include well-dressed nobles,
accompanied by bodyguards and maidservants,
and the occasional scruffy, suspicious-looking
characters that are quickly ushered out into the
merchant’s private rooms.
THE SWORD AND WINDMILL
TAVERN
Despite its central location on Vilario Street, the
Sword and Windmill has seen better days. It sells
only wines and sherries, and provides neither
food nor accommodation. The upstairs rooms
are occupied by the taverner, the increasingly
desperate Yann Marlejo, who is an old-fashioned
Vilmirian and looks poorly on open displays of
affection and emotion. Marlejo does not
encourage singing and has no time for such
frivolous pastimes such as dancing or other
forms of ‘modern’ entertainment. His disdain for
anyone flouting the traditional dress codes of
Vilmir is palpable, and as a result, only the
dourest of locals drink here; visitors are usually
disinclined to linger due to the tavern’s
depressing atmosphere.
Public tastes have turned away from the
type of tavern Yann Marlejo owns, and as a
result he is fast losing money. He is seriously
considering selling the Sword and Windmill and
moving to Jadmar in order to go into partnership
with his brother-in-law, and has an asking price
of 20,000 bronzes (although he can be 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 63 -
bargained down to 15,000). Under new
management the Sword and Windmill could be
an astute investment, as well as providing the
adventurers with a base of operations in Old
Hrolmar.
THREADNEEDLE STREET
Tailors and seamstresses are the main residents
of Threadneedle Street. From traditional
Vilmirian garments to more fanciful clothing
influence by foreign styles, all manner of outfits
can be purchased or created here.
The head of the tailor’s guild, the miserly
Calvan Zagosa, resides in Threadneedle Street
above his shop, which is patronised by the city’s
rich and wealthy. While his three apprentices
shiver on the stone floor below, Calvan sleeps in
a warm bed beneath several layers of thin
blankets. His rooms are spartan, although the
garments he creates are rich and beautiful.
Calvan hates waste and idleness, while his
apprentices simply hate him. Thanks to his
successful business, the tailor has purchased
several cheap buildings around the city, and is
slowly amassing a small fortune that he stores in
a strongbox beneath his bed.
Other notable residents of Threadneedle
Street include the dressmaker Madam Hermosa
Baltasar (whose magnificent creations cost a
small fortune, and whose shop is patronised by
the city’s most wealthy noblewomen), the
humble tailor Lucon Coruna (whose garments
are simple but sturdy), and his sister Marcella, to
whom he has not spoken in 10 years despite the
fact that their shops face each other across the
narrow thoroughfare.
GARACILOS TAILORS
This small shop is situated in Cat’s Alley off
Threadneedle Street, next door to a struggling
candlemaker’s. It is the home and residence of
the softly spoken master tailor Hervis Garacilo, a
slim, dapper man with a neat grey beard and
shaven head. Alert adventurers may notice that
the visitors who regularly enter and exit his shop
rarely seem to make any purchases, although the
tailor does not seem discomforted by this fact.
Although Hervis is indeed a tailor, and a
nimble-fingered one at that, his shop is actually
a front for a newly established gambling den. He
takes a small cut of the daily takings in return for
allowing games of cards and dice to be played
around the tables squeezed into his back room.
The operation is run by the steely-eyed Pericho
Toribio, with security and debt collection the
responsibility of his dim but burly son Ramon.
The dissolute young nobleman Earl Eduardo
Astran is a regular visitor to the gaming room,
having run out of credit at most other gaming
houses in the city.
As gambling is illegal in Vilmir, the punters
who wager their earnings in these games are
staking more than just money; they are gambling
their reputations and perhaps even their freedom
on the turn of a card. While the Grey Defenders
have not yet stumbled upon this gambling den,
the Foreign Quarter gang the Bravos have, and
Hervis has recently received a threatening visit
from Deigo Nairon demanding protection
money. He was not unduly frightened by these
events, as he is sure that the Toribos can handle
the situation.
PERICHO TORIBO
SMALL-TIME GANGSTER, AGE 45
Solidly built, square-jawed and quietly ruthless, Pericho
began his criminal career as a pickpocket when he was
just 10 years old. He soon graduated to protection
rackets and pimping, and although he has never
achieved the level of wealth and accomplishment he
craves, he has had moderate success throughout his
shadowy career. His brother, their sons and his brother in
law form the backbone of his small gang, and with their
support, Pericho recently turned his hand to gambling.
He intends to use the earnings from Hervis’ gaming
house to set up a chain of similar establishments
throughout the city, using some of the money as bribes
where necessary. He does not yet know how he will
handle the situation caused by the Bravos, and suspects
he may have to call in a few favours to resolve the
problem.
CHAOS 31, BALANCE 10, LAW 25
STR 15, CON 16, SIZ 15, INT 16, POW 14, DEX 12,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: Sea Leather,
(Helm Off) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 85% 1d3+db
Dagger 90% 1d4+2+db
Broadsword 75% 1D8+1+db
SKILLS: Bargain 81%, Conceal Object 75%, Dodge 63%,
Insight 70%, Intimidate 75%, Scowl Threatening 80%
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 64 -
RAMON PERICHO
 MUSCLE, AGE 21,
Young Ramon stands head and shoulders above his father
and has not yet finished growing. He is extremely
muscular, although not the brightest boy on the block.
CHAOS 20, BALANCE 03, LAW 07
STR 18, CON 16, SIZ 18, INT 07, POW 12, DEX 13,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 18 ARMOUR: Sea Leather,
(Helm Off) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 80% 1d3+db
Dagger 72% 1d4+2+db
Bludgeon 86% 1d8+db
SKILLS: Dodge 35%, Insight 35%, Intimidate 60%, Move
Quietly 40%, Search 35%
TOWN SQUARE
Sandwiched between Serenity Park and the
stained-glass pyramid of Elgis is Old Hrolmar’s
town square. This open stretch of cobblestones is
patronised by town criers, pickpockets,
distributors of handbills, and members of the
general public who have come to witness the
latest flogging or to pay their devotions at the
temple.
WIDOW JANNA’S BOARDING HOUSE
Following the death of her cobbler husband, the
widow Janna Dassom turned their small house
and business on Leatherworker’s Street into a
boarding house. She rents rooms out to visitors
for 35 bronzes a week, including one meal each
day, served in her gleaming, communal kitchen.
Janna prefers to let her rooms out to respectable
women, although occasionally she will take pity
on a young man and allow him to stay for a
week or two before gently encouraging him to
move on. Several of her current tenants are longterm
residents, one of whom is the Ilmioran
poetess Lucretzia Condotta. There are usually
two or three rooms available at the Widow
Janna’s at any one time, with the minimum
residency being one week.
LUCRETZIA CONDOTTA
POETESS, AGE 29
This statuesque Ilmioran beauty has long blonde hair,
pale skin, and striking green eyes. The free-spirited
daughter of a successful merchant, Lucretzia was
schooled in dancing, music and literature as a child, and
quickly proved to be a skilled poet. Two years ago she
moved to Old Hrolmar from her home in Karlaak by the
Weeping Waste, in search of inspiration and patronage,
the latter having eluded her so far.
Lucretzia is dedicated to her art, and spends long hours
labouring over a line or phrase late into the night. She is
also an incurable romantic, and may try to enlist the
adventurers’ assistance in arranging an encounter with
Duke Avan, whom she has decided she is in love wth -
although to date she has only seen him from afar. If the
duke spurns her protestations of devotion, assuming she
is even lucky enough to get close to him, Lucretzia may
transfer her adoration to one of the adventurers instead,
especially if they have assisted her in her unsuccessful
quest.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Art (Poetry) 80%, Other Language
(Low Melnibonéan) 55%
NEW HROLMAR
New Hrolmar is a colony of artists,
bohemians, travellers, cheap stalls,
seedy alehouses, colourful characters,
and a haven for down-at-heels
adventurers. As it lies outside the city
walls, weapons may be carried about
the districtwith impunity.
Caravans arrive and depart Old
Hrolmar at all hours of the night and
day, and several of its taverns never
close. Brothels and drug dens can also
be found here, although the better class of
courtesans dwell on Rose Street, in the
Merchants’ Quarter, and cheaper, more dubious
pleasures can be found to the immediate south,
in the Foreign Quarter. Almost every
conceivable business – and some that would
startle even the most liberal of citizens – can be
transacted in the maze of sidestreets branching
off from the stockyards, around which the district
is centred.
Most of New Hrolmar’s buildings are less
than five years old, and are constructed of cheap
wood, wattle, and daub. As a result fire is a
GALLOWS AND DOCKS
For minor crimes where a custodial sentence is inappropriate, the guilty
party will be sentenced to a stay in the docks or a public flogging. More
serious crimes are punished by execution, and on such occasions
gallows or a stake are erected in the Town Square. Public executions are
extremely popular, and attract huge crowds from all sections of the
Hrolmarlian society. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 65 -
permanent threat throughout the district and in
response new stone buildings are constantly
being raised, while, less frequently, older
buildings are torn down and replaced with
sturdier stone constructions. The district is not
sewered and open drains flow down the middle
of the noisome streets, emptying into the river.
CALVAN AND CO. COACH LINE
This private company runs a coach service from
Old Hrolmar to every major city in Vilmir.
Although the bone-jarring ride is extremely
uncomfortable, it is the fastest way between
cities that lies within the reach of common folk.
Due to the fact that the nobility are the major
users of the coach line, the company has
received special dispensation from the Church of
Law to permit them to own and care for the
horses necessary to draw the coaches, although
the coachmen are still forbidden to ride them,
being common-born.
Travel times and distances to destinations
including Jadmar and Uhaio can be found in
ORIENTATION. The cost of a coach trip is 10
bronze coins per 100 miles; i.e. a one-way trip
to Jadmar will cost 45 bronzes, while a trip to
Ordis costs 65 bronzes per passenger.
Culvan and Company’s only rivals in Old
Hrolmar are the neighbouring coach
company of Fulgenico and Blasco, who
manage to undercut Culvan’s prices at
every turn, and yet still seem to turn a tidy
profit.
The company is operated by the vulgar
but resourceful Alajandro Calvan, a broad,
squat man with bushy eyebrows and a
permanently sweat-soaked brow. He is
easily amused by crude jokes and bodily
functions, and his wife, Izabel, is currently
pregnant with their six child. The two eldest
Calvan children are the twins Inigio and
Culvan, strapping young lads of 15
summers who ably assist their father in his
work. Four-year old Maria and eight year
old Alejandro junior are the other surviving
family members following the accidental
death of six-year old Carlos last winter.
Alejandro Culvan’s business partner is
his younger brother Ferndancio, a plain
man with a good heart, whose severe stutter
and chronic shyness have thus far ensured
heis unmarried. Ferdanico is hopelessly in
love with Algenia Fulgenico, the only daughter
of his family’s main rival, but he keeps his
feelings for the girl carefully concealed.
MARIANO ARRIETA BARANDIARÁN
A MAN TO KNOW, AGE 42
This bold and flamboyant Ilmioran, his auburn hair and
moustachios always impecably groomed, is one of the
best caravan masters in Old Hrolmar. When a merchant
needs to transport their goods they come to Mariano,
and he coordinates the hiring of trustworthy guards, the
purchase of suitable transport and supplies, and so forth.
He always asks for a set fee, unlike some of his peers
who prefer to take a percentage of the sales after the
caravan has reached its destination, (he would rather a
definite fee rather than an uncertain figure). As a result,
while he is not rich, he is a successful and well-respected
man.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Bargain 103%, Ride 95%
DURRES STABLES & LIVERY
Santigo Durres owns this thriving business,
which has an excellent reputation and many
valuable clients, including Calvan and Co
Coaches. Although Santigo has a good eye for
horseflesh and offers nothing but the best feed to
his customers, it is the group of Shazarian
grooms he employs who are the true masters of
CARAVANS
All manner of goods are transported by caravan across Vilmir, including
a range of spices, some of which are of great value; gold and silver; bolts
of silk; variously-ornamented apparel; arms and weapons of divers forms;
coats of mail; costly cushions, pavilions, tents, biscuits, bread, barley,
grain, meal, and a large quantity of conserves and medicines; basins,
bladders, chess-boards; silver dishes and candlesticks; pepper,
cinnamon, sugar, and wax; and other valuables of choice and various
kinds.
Some caravans consist of heavily laden horses, others of ox-drawn
wagons. In the Sighing Desert caravans of camels are common, although
these humped beasts are largely unknown beyond the desert’s fringes.
Adventurers can easily find employment riding with a caravan as a
casual guard; once arriving at the destination the guards are dismissed
and their wages paid (although not always promptly).
There is no central point at which caravans are coordinated;
instead they spring up over discussions in taverns, or are hired by
merchants preparing to move stock. Should the adventurers’ wish to seek
employment as a caravan guard, they are advised to inquire around the
saleyards for possible openings, or to make themselves known at New
Hrolmar’s array of inns and taverns where caravan masters and
merchants readily congregate. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 66 -
the stables. Under their watchful eyes any steed
that is quartered here leaves in better condition
than when it arrived. The chief groom,
Ohzadhan of Dioperda, is a devotee of
Vvwyy’hunnh, the Beast Lord of horses, and
consequently has a mystical connection with the
animals in his care. Like most of his countrymen,
he is a skilled and wild rider; he chafes under
the Vilmirian law, which forbids those of
common blood from horse riding.
THE GIFT OF GOLDAR
The Gift of Goldar is one of the few taverns in
the city where gambling openly flourishes, albeit
in a discrete rear room behind the main
taproom. Games of luck and chance are played
here night and day, and the tavern itself never
closes. Its kitchen serves simple but wholesome
meals, and drink prices are kept low in order to
encourage the clientele to be able to wager more
on the tables.
Duke Avan and his cousin Earl Eduardo are
numbered among the gaming room’s regular
visitors, although of late Eduardo has made
himself scarce as he owes the proprietor more
than 20,000 bronzes and his line of credit has
not been extended.
Armed guards employed by the tavern’s
owner, the jocular Filkharian Ari Hakon, escort
winners home to ensure their safety, and help
maintain the tavern’s reputation for honesty and
quality. Captain Artimio Guerrero, the
commander of the North Gate, has several times
tried to close the tavern, to no avail.
FULGENICO AND BLASCO,
COACHLINES AND CARTERS
Co-owned by Horton Fulgenico and Hugeot
Blasco, this cut-price coachline offers cheaper
travel than their neighbours and rivals, Culvan
and Company. Fulgenico and Blasco’s coaches
are slower and smaller than those of their rivals,
as they rely on teams of ponies, rather than
horses to haul them. Despite this, and despite
their startlingly low prices, they pair still seem to
turn a comfortable profit. They also supplement
their income by hiring out ox-carts to those in
need of heavier transport.
Unknown to all bar a handful of rogues,
Fulgenico and Blasco are a vital link in Old
Hrolmar’s black market. They transport drugs
and other illicit goods out of the city aboard their
coaches, usually concealed in the luggage of an
unsuspecting and innocent traveller. With the
profits they make from such activities they
manage to undersell their rivals Culvan and Co
yet still live richly and well.
The two men are a familiar sight around
New Hrolmar, and are easily identified by their
ruddy features and rich clothes. Blasco, the
youngest of the pair, is unmarried, and has his
lascivious eyes set on his drunken and oblivious
partner’s virginal young daughter, Algenia
Fulgenico. Unlike Horton Fulgenico, who
remains ignorant of the true nature of the
organisation they serve, Blasco is well aware that
the cult of Slortar is behind the smuggling ring,
and in recent months he has begun to speculate
about joining the cult.
Algenia Fulgenico, who was taught to read
and write by her late mother, keeps the
company’s accounts. Her pale face can often be
glimpsed gazing despairingly out from her
bedroom window above the firm’s offices and
stables. Although her father thinks her ignorant
of his involvement in the smuggling ring, Algenia
put two and two together long ago, although she
has not yet spoken of her concerns to anyone;
nor has she shared her fears about the
increasingly persistent advances of Hugeot
Blasco.
THE LABOR IN VAIN
This dingy inn is located a stone’s throw – and
within smelling distance – of the stockyards. Its
beds are poor and its food, if possible, is worse.
The establishments only claim to fame, other
than a range of wines as unpalatable as they are
cheap, is the ratting pit in its rear yard. Most
nights see a terrier or other dog thrown into the
pit, swiftly followed by an upturned sack of
starving rats, with bets taken on how many rats
the dog can kill before they bring it down. The
Labor in Vain is owned and operated by Vust
Malcon, a grimy, malodorous Hrolmarlian.
THE LIGHT OF HOME
This small but popular inn sells the usual range
of wines and ales, as well as smattering of meads
and ciders to cater for foreign tastes. Also
offering comfortable but simple accommodation
in its upstairs rooms, it is owned and operated by 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 67 -
the lanky Purple Towner Zandaran Longshanks,
who is a dab hand in the kitchen when he finds
the time to cook. When he does get the
opportunity to bake, his honeycakes are
superlative, although they are not the inn’s main
attraction, this honour being reserved for its
range of resident musicians and entertainers.
Zandaran has travelled widely (at the
Gamemaster’s discretion he may even have
visited a neighbouring plane, and be a valuable
source of information about that nearby world)
and originally intended only to pass through Old
Hrolmar. However, attracted by the city’s
pleasant climate and burgeoning bohemian
culture, he found himself staying.
The Light of Home was one of the first inns
to open in the New Hrolmar district, and today
still attracts a vibrant clientele. Poets, painters,
petty criminals and dusty travellers all rub
shoulders at the bar, admiring the exotic
artworks that Zandaran Longshanks has hung
upon the walls and swapping oft repeated
anecdotes.
The inn is an occasional home away from
home for the Filkharian raconteur Ranyart Finn,
a notorious teller-of-tales that can entrance the
entire venue with his remarkable stories, and
more recently was the temporary abode of
Ilmioran troubadour Matteus Tomaso during his
tour of the city.
ARNAO RAMONET
ENFANT TERRIBLÉ, AGE 17
A devotee of Theril of Law, this musically accomplished
young Vilmirian peasant left his home in Rignariom
several months ago in search of creative inspiration. He
is short, skinny and unwashed, with tangled, lice-infested
hair, a foul mouth and even fouler personal habits.
Although he can neither read nor write, he has perfect
pitch, and can play a song note for note after hearing it
only once. He pays for his accommodation by performing
in the taproom most nights, and busks for food and coins
on the portico of the Grand Bazaar most days.
Consequently his compositions are beginning to find an
audience.
Arnao’s musical talents are flowering in Old Hrolmar’s
bohemian atmosphere, as is his dedication to dissolution.
His recent songs have become so popular that the Duke
himself has been heard humming his tunes, and some
individuals amongst the nobility have begun to seek out
Arnao’s services for their soirees - although they are
inevitably shocked that such sublime music can come
from so coarse a youth. His cursing, drunkenness and
reckless behaviour have ensured that the Inquisition are
already monitoring him; so too are the cult of Slortar,
who hope to claim his talents for their own.
The adventurers might meet this teenage prodigy in
Serenity Park, where Arnao often retreats in order to
contemplate his Goddess and coax a new tune from the
flute or guitar; or at the bazaar. He could also be
encountered carousing in a New Hrolmar brothel or
tavern, amongst whose denizens he also finds
inspiration; or brawling in the streets.
CHAOS 27, BALANCE 17, LAW 21
STR 11, CON 10, SIZ 11, INT 15, POW 17, DEX 15,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 11 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 50% 1d3+db
Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Musical Composition) 110%, Art (Play Any
Instrument) 101%, Art (Seduction) 75%, Bargain 55%,
Dodge 46%, Fast Talk 68%, Insight 45%, Listen 101%,
Sing 95%, Young Kingdoms 35%
NEW HROLMAR MARKET
This bustling open-air market sells a range
of fresh produce from outlying farms, as well as
an eclectic collection of other goods and
trinkets. Probably unsurprisingly, more than a
third of the stallholders are foreign-born, and the
market runs six days a week, opening at 5am
and closing at midday.
ADALBERTO OF OBERLORN
COBBLER, AGE 35
Although mute, this Ilmioran immigrant is a skilled
cobbler. His deft hands can patch a sole in minutes, and
his shoes are comfortable and long lasting. With the help
of his wife Tertzia, with whom he converses in sign
language, Adalberto has a thriving trade.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Sign Language 55%, Craft (Cobble)
91%
FODRIC ESHOLTA
MERCHANT AND DRUG-DEALER, AGE 40
Originally from the town of Kletch, in the duchy of Uhaio,
this plump, pop-eyed man sells fresh fruit and
vegetables, as well as dried herbs, from his market-place
stall. He also, thanks to his contacts with the city’s
smugglers, sells drugs, including opium and garbleweed,
to a select clientele. A nervous man, Esholta would sever
his ties with the smugglers were he to learn of their ties
to Chaos, although whether they would be willing to end
their profitable arrangement is another question entirely.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Bargain 78%, Insight 85%
ASHLYN DRAVEN
FILKHARIAN FORTUNE-TELLER, AGE 17
This slender, attractive girl reads cards with startling
accuracy. Since her alcoholic father became incapable of
holding down a job following his wife’s death, Ashlyn’s
earnings are all that keep him and her three younger
siblings from starving. Although shy, her beauty ensures
that she is popular with the local youths, a situation that 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 68 -
causes other girls to spread malicious gossip about her.
Their most recent slander is that Ashlyn is a witch: should
this rumour reach the ears of the Church of Law the
consequences could be extremely dire for Ashlyn and her
family.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Tell Fortune 96%
NEW HROLMAR MUSIC HALL
Although its acoustics are not ideal, this drafty,
leaking building plays host to some of the best
musicians in the Young Kingdoms. From choral
groups to solo artists, the small stage in this
haphazardly constructed auditorium has played
host to moving, inspiring and haunting
performances.
Musical acts are selected by Mistress
Serafina Forli, an intimidating Ilmioran diva who
maintains discerning tastes despite having long
since retired from the stage herself. Adventurers
wishing to play here must have a minimum skill
of 51% in their chosen instrument to even
entertain the possibility of an audition.
Performances take place Starday through to
Waterday, with some concerts being staged free
of charge, and others attracting a modest fee
depending on the capability of the performers.
Of late the most audacious performance
was by the Ilmioran troubadour Matteus Tomaso,
who played for six hours non-stop only to inform
the audience at the conclusion of proceedings
that he regarded the evening as a glorified
rehearsal - as none of the citizens in stultifying
Vilmir had the wit nor the freedom to enjoy his
music to the degree it demanded. He was
escorted offstage to a cacophony of boos and
cheers, and Duke Avan was witnessed
applauding his controversial remarks.
OPIUM DEN
Run by a debauched Lormyrian named Eysten
the Unwashed (although few dare call him so to
his unshaven face), this den of iniquity is located
above a struggling potter’s studio, in the shadows
of the city walls. Watched over by his brutish
Yurit bodyguards, Eysten squats like a malignant
toad behind his desk at the top of the stairs,
keeping a close eye on everyone who enters and
leaves his premises. A pipe of opium brings vivid
dreams and a brief escape from the cares of the
world to anyone who can afford the 5 bronzes
which the Lormyrian charges. The young
troubador Arnao Ramonet, a temporary resident
of the Light of Home Inn, is a regular visitor here.
PAWNBROKERS STREET
Pawnbrokers’ Street is a narrow but busy dirtpaved
road one block away from the stockyards.
It is lined with small shops and stalls, all doing a
busy trade in second-hand goods. The city’s
desperate pawn their goods for coins in the hope
of redeeming them in some prosperous future,
while those departing on caravans often sell their
unwanted and unnecessary belongings here in
order to lighten their loads. At the Gamemaster’s
discretion all manner of goods might be found
here, although rare and enchanted items are
unlikely to be discovered except in the most
surprising of circumstances.
MISTRESS SALAZAR’S PAWNSHOP
This shop is operated out of the front room of
Mistress Fausta Salazar’s humble abode. The
horizontal shutters of her front window swing
open to form an awning and a counter, behind
which the plump and smiling shopkeeper plies
her trade, her hair tied up in a daringly colourful
headscarf. She specialises in second-hand
clothes, and sells everything from shoes to
wedding dresses at a reasonable price. A
worshipper of Goldar, Mistress Fausta thinks the
changes the Duke has wrought in the city are
good for trade, although she has expressed some
concern about the influx of foreigners and their
strange ways in recent years.
SMITHY
On the western fringes of New Hrolmar, on the
banks of the Hrol, stands the forge of the
Ilmioran-born Pietro of Ilmar. This powerfully
built man, whose eyebrows have long since
been burnt away and whose singed beard is
cropped short, wears a leather cap and a charred
leather apron over his grimy working clothes. As
well as being an excellent blacksmith, Pietro is a
discrete worshipper of Kakataal. A salamander
calls the forge home, dancing in the flames, as
Witch Sight may reveal, and the handful of fireworshippers
dwelling in Old Hrolmar pay their
respects to their god here, although their services
are perforce low key. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 69 -
STOCKYARDS
The stockyards are the heart and soul of New
Hrolmar, and all manner of beasts change hands
here: cattle bound for the slaughterhouses of the
Industrial Quarter, herds of goats, squealing pigs;
mules and ponies. Poultry and fowls can be
purchased in the nearby market, quacking and
clucking away inside wicker cages. Old
Hrolmar’s prices are slightly inflated compared
to elsewhere in the Young Kingdoms, with an
average saddlehorse selling for 2,200 bronzes,
mules for 1,500 and oxen for at least 2,000 per
head. Work is often available here, although
usually only for a day or two at a time.
ULF EEL URDON MREOWUSHAR
WARRIOR, AGE 35
This short, stocky, scowling woman is the battle-leader of
the Mreowushuar tribe of the Weeping Waste, and a
formidable warrior who has already united two of her
tribe’s squabbling clans. She is short and muscular, and
her cheeks are marked by a series of raised, parallel
scars, while her head is shaved except for a single,
plaited scalp lock.
Ulf arrived in Old Hrolmar only days ago, on the trail of
her lover Jed Larn Varass, who was carried off by
Vilmirian slavers late last year. With the guidance of the
gods and spirits, in addition to her natural cunning, Ulf
has tracked them to Old Hrolmar, but has temporarily
lost the trail among the bustle of the city. She has found
temporary work and shelter at the stockyards, from
which she heads out each night on sorties. Although she
hates the Dry Lands (as the Waste-folk call the world
outside their land of eternal rain) she has vowed to stay
until she has found or avenged her lover.
Ulf does not yet know that Jed is held prisoner only a few
blocks away from the stockyards, at the Wreath of Roses
brothel. Her vengeance, should she discover this
(perhaps with the aid of kindly elementals, which her
clan’s shaman has taught her to summon) will be terrible.
CHAOS 22, BALANCE 16, LAW 20
STR 15 CON 15 SIZ 10 INT 13 POW 16 DEX 17
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: Hide & Furs 1D3
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Long Spear 107% 1d10+1+db
Short Spear 89% 1D6+1+db
Dagger 110% 1d4+2+db
Full shield 76% 1d4+db+kb
SPELLS: Bounty of Straasha, Summon Elemental, Wings
of Lassa
SKILLS: Climb 87%, Dodge 44, Hide 50%, Insight 80%,
Jump 75%, Listen 61%, Move Quietly 83%, Natural World
67%, Navigate 85%, Oratory 85%, Own Language
(Mong) 60%, Other Language (Common) 15%,
Scent/Taste 50%, Search 64%, Swim 37%, Throw 75%,
Track 75%, Trap 73%, Young Kingdoms 05%
THE WREATH OF ROSES BROTHEL
The darker side of life in New Hrolmar is
displayed in this brothel. None of the young
women who work here do so willingly. Chained
to their beds or locked in their rooms, they are
beaten, starved, drugged and abused into
submission. Most are runaways or foreigners
who came to Old Hrolmar in search of a better
life but ended up in this living hell.
The Wreath of Roses is hidden off a side
street near the market. Its door only opens to
those who know the password: “The rose is
freshly plucked.” The brothel-keeper is one
Dieguito Fornova, a handsome, pleasantseeming
man in his late 20’s whose easy smile
masks a cruel and brutal soul. He does not own
the brothel, but in the absence of his mysterious
master Dieguito has absolute power within its
walls. He is abetted by a small but loyal group of
hirelings, including the swaggering Pan Tangian
warrior Verkij Vl’al, and several other
mercenaries who guard the Wreath of Roses
from unwelcome guests and help prevent its
prisoners from escaping.
The brothel’s secretive owner is the highranking
Hrolmarlian nobleman Lord Garçilaso
Domingo, who established the business in order
to provide a safe outlet for the depraved tastes of
his insane eldest son. Lord Garcilaso strives to
ensure that his involvement with the Wreath of
Roses is keep a closely guarded secret, and he
will not hesitate to order the deaths of any who
uncover it. More details about this unpleasant
nobleman and his psychotic son can be found in
the Hilltown section of this chapter.
DIEGUITO FORNOVA
BROTHEL-KEEPER, AGE 28
This charmless man fancies himself a colourful rogue; in
truth Fornova is a base villain whose only redeeming
features are his smooth tongue, natural cunning and
quick reflexes. He poses as a poet and philosopher, but
the well educated are usually quick to see through his
façade. A coward at heart, he delights in abusing those
weaker than himself. Thanks to his master’s influence
Dieguitto’s conviction for rape was quietly dropped some
years ago, but with it hanging over his head he is quick
to carry out Lord Garilaso’s every command. On the first
Moonday of the month he meets with the brothel’s
reclusive owner at the nearby Gift of Goldar tavern, in
order to hand over the month’s profits and discuss
business.
CHAOS 37, BALANCE 02, LAW 31
STR 11, CON 12, SIZ 12, INT 17, POW 15, DEX 16,
APP 14 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 70 -
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: Soft Leather,
(Helm Off) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 90% 1d6+1+db
Brawl 65% 1D3+db
Dagger 78% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Appreciate Poetry) 20%, Bargain 66%,
Dodge 75%, Fast Talk 85%, Hide70%, Insight 82%, Own
Language (Common) 85%, Scribe 50%
VERKIJ VL’AL
PAN TANGIAN MERCENARY, AGE 31
Forced to leave Pan Tang due to a particularly vicious
family feud, Vl’al (whose uncle is the Bishop of Slortar)
has travelled the Young Kingdoms for several months,
gaining insight into the weaknesses of its nations. He
hopes to use this accumulated wisdom as a bargaining
chip for his return to the Demon Isle. Although he
despises the weak and posturing brothel keeper, Vl’al is
presently happy enough to work for Fornova, as the
position allows him ample opportunity to slake his
sadistic lusts while gaining special insight into Old
Hrolmar’s darker secrets. The Pan Tangian is aware that
the cult of Slortar is active in Old Hrolmar, but is not a
member of the sect, preferring to save his devotion for
the Chaos Lord Mabelrode Sword-King.
CHAOS 40, BALANCE 03, LAW 11
STR 16, CON 15, SIZ 16, INT 13, POW 16, DEX 16,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: Leather and Rings
(Helm On) 1D6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword (demon) 96% 1d8+1+db+2D8
Sea Axe 87% 2D6+2+db
Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
SPELLS: Bonds Unbreakable ((3), Hell’s Armour (1-4),
Hell’s Sharp Razor (1-4), Rat Vision (1), Speed Of Vezhan
(1-3), Summon Demon (1), Sureness Of Cran Liret (1-4)
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: One Balboost Demon,
Bound Into His Sword
SKILLS: Conceal Object 55%, Dodge 64%, Hide 78%,
Million Spheres 10%, Move Quietly 90%, Own Language
(Mabden) 88%, Other Language (Common) 70%, Potions
50%, Young Kingdoms 45%
VERKIJ’S LESSER DEMON SWORD
A broadsword of gleaming black metal, it has a pulsating
chaos symbol in the jewel of the pommel.
INT 8, POW 16
ABILITIES: Demon Weapon, +2d8 Damage
NEED: To be oiled with rendered human fat once a week
JED LARN VARASS MREOWUSHAR
 CAPTIVE, AGE 19
This dark haired, dark skinned, diminutive young woman
is kept chained to her bed to prevent her from killing the
clients who pay for her favours. She is a native of the
Weeping Waste, a member of the Marsh Cat tribe’s
Bearded Tree clan who taken as a slave by a party of
Vilmirian merchants late last year. She was sold to the
Wreath of Roses less than a month ago, and in that time
she has already nearly strangled one guard and tried to
bite off the nose of the first man who tried to rape her.
Fornova is close to ordering her death in order to save
himself any further convenience.
Jed recently received a vision (sent by kindly Lady Laza,
the Wind Goddess) that her lover, the warrior-woman Ulf
Eel of the Quaking Ground clan was close to rescuing
her. Without this hope Jed would have forced her
captives to kill her rather than suffer further indignities at
the hands of the Drylanders. Once she escapes her
vengeance will be swift and terrible.
CHAOS 08, BALANCE 21, LAW 11
STR 11, CON 10, SIZ 7, INT 13, POW 14, DEX 16,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 8 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Burning Brand 50% 1d6+db
Brawl 95% 1D3+db
Dagger 90% 1d4+2+db
Small Club 65% 1d6+db
SKILLS: Climb 60%, Boating 85%, Dodge 50%, Insight
65%, Listen 70%, Movie Quietly 78%, Own Language
(Mong) 75%, Scent/Taste 80%, Swim 65%, Track 60%,
Trap 55%
QUAYSIDE
The district known as Quayside is nestled at the
foot of the city’s southern wall and stretches
away to the west around the pebbled shore of
the bay. Quayside is dominated by the busy
harbour and its attendant fishing village, and is
home to the city’s main fish-market.
The scents of salt, seaweed and fish are
strong throughout the district, and mingle with
the odours of spices and sweat. Drying nets are
strung up everywhere. Burly longshoreman
lugging wicker baskets of freshly harvested
mussels and other produce, and tattooed sailors
carrying all their worldly goods slung in a canvas
satchel over one arm are just some of the people
who traverse Quayside’s dirt-paved streets on a
daily basis.
Ships arrive night and day, while the fishing
fleet puts out every evening and returns shortly
after dawn the following day, to be welcomed by
families, market stall owners and hungry stray
cats. Sailors and foreigners, ragamuffin children,
pipe-smoking fisherman and drunken sailors
make up much of the district’s residents. The 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 71 -
city’s guardsmen, the Grey Defenders, make
regular patrols.
Also to be found in Quayside are shipping
offices, warehouses storing bales of Ilmioran
cloth and beams of Weeping Waste timber, the
Harbourmaster’s office, and numerous poor but
respectable residences, populated in the main by
fisherfolk
and their
families.
Like New
Hrolmar,
many of
the
buildings
in
Quayside are built of wattle and daub, rather
than the sturdier stone construction that
dominates inside the city’s walls. As a result fire
is a constant danger here.
CASTANON SHIPYARDS
To the west of Quayside stand the Castanon
shipyards, one of several shipyards providing
secure employment for many of Old Hrolmar’s
locals. Until last century the ships were built of
local cedar harvested in the Hrol Valley, but
with the resulting deforestation, today the timber
must be imported from the Weeping Waste.
The Castanon family’s, patriarch is the
elderly Bartolm Castanon, a white-haired, white
beared old salt whose voice can constantly be
heard barking out gruff orders at the small army
of men he commands. Bartolm has two sons,
who will inherit equal shares in the shipyards
upon his death.
Hortun Castanon, 45, takes after his father;
he is a stolid, hard-working although
unimaginative man. Hortun and his wife, Nalda,
have five children, although a sixth is on its way.
Nicolao Castanon, 33, is more ambitious
then his brother, and lusts for the wealth and
influence than the part-share in the shipyards
will eventually bring him. For this reason
Nicolao has secretly joined forces with the city’s
smuggling ring, ensuring that several ships
recently built in the Castanon shipyards were
constructed to their detailed specifications, with
secret compartments hidden inside cabins or
below decks in which black market and illegal
goods can safely be stowed. If his involvement
with the smugglers was to be discovered by the
authorities, the entire shipyard could be forfeit, a
fact the selfish Nicolao has not considered.
THE CHIPPED CUP
The cheapest inn in Quayside, with
accommodation charged at 4 bronzes per night
for a space on
the taproom
floor, 15 bronze
for a dormitory
bed, and 46
bronzes for an
uncomfortable
bed in a private
room. The rushes
on the floors are rarely changed, the beds are
flea-infested, and the clientele are unsavoury.
The Grey Defenders suspect that the Chipped
Cup is a centre for the drug trade, but to date
they have no proof to these claims. The
innkeeper is the foul-mouthed, one-eyed Inigo
Mulay, a corpulent, sweaty and cantankerous
man of indeterminate age.
Here one will find poor travellers eking out
their last coins on a cup on sour wine; starving
refugees from the north whose farms have been
devoured by the Dinner-of-Dust; unsuccessful
poets brooding on their lack of fame; and pressgangs
planning their next abductions over rough
wooden tables crudely carved with the initials
and fantasies of drunken sailors. While the
kitchen at The Chipped Cup does serve gruels
and cheap stews, their ingredients are rarely
recognisable and never palatable.
LOKAN OF CADSANDRIA
DISSOLUTE SMUGGLER, AGE 37
This odious little Argimilite is a habitual criminal: a thief,
a drug addict and a smuggler. He is also a worshipper of
the cult of Slortar, although he only pays lip service to
Chaos, except at such times as his life is threatened. With
his lank red hair, greasy and pockmarked skin, rotten
teeth, gaunt figure and shifty eyes, Lokan is a poor
advertisement for the criminal life. If captured, he has no
compunction about begging for his life, which he does
with a nasal whine.
Although only lowly ranked in Old Hrolmar’s criminal
fraternity, Lokan nonetheless is sly enough to have
memorised the names of several of his superiors, most
notably Emilio Sisinner, in case he ever needs to bargain
for his freedom or his life with valuable information.
Lokan’s main role for the gang is to recruit visiting sailors
and encourage them to transport illicit goods and items
into and out of the city. More details about Old
Hrolmar’s smugglers can be found in PLOTS AND POWERS.
Elric heard their footsteps running on the cobbles and
he began to laugh. At the sound of his laugh the
footfalls became a scamper and the party had soon
reached the quayside where the water gleamed,
turned a corner and disappeared.
THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 72 -
CHAOS 46, BALANCE 3, LAW 23
STR 8, CON 14, SIZ 11, INT 12, POW 15, DEX 13,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Sea Leather,
(Helm Off) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Thieves’ Bludgeon 73% 1d8+db
Thrown Dagger 65% 1d4+2+1/2db
Strangle Cord 79% Suffocation (as per
drowning)
SKILLS: Bargain 65%, Beg 50%, Conceal Object 43%,
Dodge 57%, Evaluate 65%, Fast Talk 65%, Hide 45%, Pick
Lock 35%, Pick Pocket 40%, Scent/Taste 66%
DOCKS
Seven main piers jut out into the deep and
sheltered waters of Hrolmar Bay from the shore.
They are solidly constructed of heavy timber,
and provide berths for over 50 ships at any one
time. On summer days naked children dive from
their planks into the waves below, while seals
dart between the barnacle-encrusted beams
firmly sunk into the seabed below. The local
fishing fleet is congregated about the western
wharves, while commercial shipping moor at
those wharves closer to the city gates. Other
ships anchor on open water, using rowboats to
cross to the shore.
THE DUKE’S HEAD
The Duke’s Head is indisputably the best public
house in Quayside. Visiting sea captains stay
here seeking respite from their ships, and rub
shoulders with a better class of traveller, as well
as the drably dressed, puritanical nobles from
neighbouring duchies, who stare with open
contempt at the laxity they see around them.
The Duke’s Head serves only the finest
local wines and the best ales. Its common-room
plays host to poets and visiting philosophers, as
well as to slumming young nobles and their
obsequious hangers-on. Dormitory beds here
cost 18 bronzes a night, while a private room
costs 50 bronzes. The innkeeper, the thin-lipped
Master Alsen Audres, does not allow people to
sleep in the common room.
INAGO REMATI
CONFIDENCE TRICKSTER, AGE 40
This refined, silver-haired Ilmioran passes himself off as a
successful merchant seeking new business partners. His
clothes are of the finest Tarkeshite silk, capped off with a
heavy coat of Lormyrian mink. His lace handkerchief
scatters traces of gold dust whenever he pulls it from his
sleeve. Inago typically impresses a likely target with his
apparent wealth, then casually ask them if they would
like to become his partners in his latest venture, a gold
mine in the Bone Hills on the coast of the Sighing Desert.
Once he persuades his unfortunate new partner to part
with a large sum of wealth, he issues them with
worthless but seemingly binding contracts confirming
their share in the mine, and then absconds to a new city
with their money.
CHAOS 37, BALANCE 5, LAW 29
STR 11, CON 13, SIZ 14, INT 16, POW 15, DEX 10,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Shortsword 73% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 65% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Bargain 75%, Disguise 55%, Evaluate 65%, Fast
Talk 75%, Insight 80%, Oratory 80%
FISH MARKET
This open-air market lies at the heart of
Quayside, and is surrounded by a maze of
fishermen’s cottages, warehouses, small
businesses, side streets and alleyways. Each
morning, shortly after dawn, the fishing fleet
unloads most of its catch here, and the
marketplace thrums with activity. In the
afternoons, however, the place is almost empty;
the only occupants of the site mangy street cats
and seagulls fighting over scraps.
HARBOUR-MASTER’S OFFICE
This small office is situated in the tower room of
a wattle and daub building constructed close to
the shore. The building below is occupied by an
array of importers, exporters and insurance firms,
one of who, Emilio Sisinner, is secretly a key
figure in the city’s smuggling gang (see below).
The harbour master’s office offers sweeping
views of the harbour and the bay through large,
diamond-paned windows. An array of maps are
found here, tacked to the walls and spread out
on every available surface, together with lists
and ledgers of manifests, shipping lines, and
charts of tides and currents. A detailed model of
a Melnibonéan battle-barge stands on the
mantelpiece, while a large and loud parrot from
the Unmapped Continent sits on a perch by the
door. It shrieks loudly whenever strangers enter
the room, and is likely to be a marvellous
novelty to most visitors. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 73 -
AMLISS ARRAGO
HARBOUR MASTER, AGE 53
The harbour master is a stout, florid man with a white
beard and hair. He sports a wooden leg (his left leg was
lost to a shark after the ship he once captained was sunk
by Pan Tangian pirates) and owes his position to Duke
Avan, who he served under as second mate many years
ago. He is also a close friend of Captain Satigo,
commander of the South Gate, and the two can often be
found of an evening sharing news over a bottle of wine
in one of Quayside’s better establishments. Arrago is a
familiar sight in the district, hopping about the streets on
his peg leg and a crutch. His office keeps the cargo and
passenger manifests for the entire port. Several young
scribes assist Arrago in his duties.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Command Crew 87%, Own
Language 75%, Sailing 78%, Scribe 64%, Young
Kingdoms 60%
THE SCALES OF GOLDAR
This popular inn stands right on the edge of the
harbour. It is less grand than the neighbouring
Duke’s Head, but is perhaps more comfortable
due to its lack of pretensions. Its visitors include
several retired captains renting rooms on a
permanent basis, merchants who take suites for
an extended stay, successful artists, and the
better class of adventurers. Among its current
guests is a secretive young man calling himself
Orlan of Aflitain. The innkeeper is a retired
member of the Grey Defenders, the convivial
Pethron Alvaro. He is stout, red-faced and bald,
and prone to gout.
The most notable feature of the Scales of
Goldar is its downstairs bar, which, with a thick
window made from a single pane of
Melnibonéan glass looking out into the harbour
below the waterline, is cool and green-lit. This
marvellous window was donated by Duke Avan
himself, and provides drinkers with startling
views of fish flickering through softly undulating
beds of seaweed, darting seals, and the barnacleencrusted
hulls of ships. (For more details about
the Scales of Goldar see the adventure ‘Stolen
Moments’ in Perils of the Young Kingdoms.)
ORLAN OF AFLITAIN
AGENT OF LAW, AGE 23
Orlan is a slender young woman, with dark skin and
eyes, and short-cropped black hair, who is currently
passing herself off as a young man. Twelve months ago,
she swore an oath of vengeance in the name of the
White Lord Tovik, after her family in Shazar was killed by
a plague of the undead unleashed by a necromancer
known only as ‘the Cold One’.
Orlan’s pursuit of the necromancer lead to Old Hrolmar
three months ago, and her search has so far been
concentrated in the Foreign Quarter (as experience has
taught her that her enemy is naturally drawn to such
miserable places).
Unknown to Orlan, the Cold One has hidden herself
among the nobles of Hilltown, and has yet to draw
attention to herself. Complicating matters, Orlan has
found herself unable to ride her battle-trained gelding
withinthe city, as she is not of noble birth. As a result,
her horse is stabled nearby, while her battle-blade is
hidden beneath her mattress.
CHAOS 17, BALANCE 21, LAW 56
STR 16, CON 13, SIZ 13, INT 15, POW 17, DEX 14,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: Leather and Rings
(No Helm) 1d6
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 95% 1d8+1+db
Heavy Mace 75% 1d8+2+db
Dagger 65% 1d4+2+db
Small Shield 90% 1d3+db+kb
SPELLS: Field Of Law (4), Witch Sight (3)
SKILLS: Bargain 75%, Brood On Vengeance 95%, Craft
(Blacksmithing) 81%, Disguise 80%, Dodge 78%, Insight
45%, Ride 90%, Move Quietly 75%, Track 92%, Young
Kingdoms 50%
SEWERS
At low tide the sewers that empty Old Hrolmar’s
waste into the harbour beneath the headland are
visible from Quayside. Solidly constructed, they
are one of the few remnants of Old Hrolmar’s
Melnibonéan heritage still standing, and
represent a marvel of engineering. As well as
being used by the city’s smugglers, they provide
a secret (albeit noisome) network of tunnels
linking the city’s major landmarks that are
illicitly employed by Old Hrolmar’s least
scrupulous citizens.
SINNISER AND CO. SHIPPING
AGENTS
Located under the very nose of the harbour
master is the office of Emilio Sinniser, one of the
ringleaders of Old Hrolmar’s gang of smugglers.
His dusty and untidy rooms are located on the
third floor of the warehouse-cum-office building,
whose squat tower is occupied by the elderly
official and his staff. From here Sinniser
coordinates a network of sailors, ruffians and
corrupt officials who assist in the importation
and exporting of drugs, forbidden grimoires,
demonic enchantments and other contraband
that makes it way through the city. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 74 -
Sinniser is at pains to ensure that nothing
incriminating can be found in his office, and an
elaborate code ensures that his written records
appear to be innocent receipts of grain, linen
and other commonplace goods - not even an
elaborate search will uncover any obvious
trappings of Chaos-worship here. When he
needs to meet with his lieutenants he does so at
the Chipped Cup, a disreputable Quayside inn.
Meetings with his master, the spice merchant
Pascule Janucho, are conducted in the Fane of
Slortar beneath the city, never in his office or at
Janucho’s shop in the Grand Bazaar.
Should the adventurers’ stumble upon the
existence of the smuggling ring, Sinniser will
have no qualms about dispatching cutthroats to
silence them before they can expose the
operation (see the HROLMARLIAN DIGEST, for the
appropriate statistics for the smuggler’s bravos).
EMILIO SINNISER
CRIME LORD, AGE 40
Because the merchant Pascule Janucho is at such pains to
keep his role as head of Old Hrolmar’s smuggling ring
hidden, his right hand man, Emilio Sinniser, is thought
(by those whose business it is to know such things) to be
the head of the city’s criminal syndicate. Sinniser is a
powerfully built man of middle age, with powerful
muscles hidden beneath a concealing layer of fat. His
eyes are a cool grey, his lips thin, and his expression
invariably calm. His dark brown hair is slicked back, and
he is clean-shaven. A port-wine coloured birthmark is
prominent on his left cheek, and he speaks in an urbane,
educated voice, which drops to an icy whisper when he
is angered.
Sinniser is a devout worshipper of Slortar and utterly
faithful to the Dark Lady, even though, of late, he has
begun to question his loyalty to Janucho. Slortar
promises his followers pleasure, and for Sinniser, the only
lasting pleasure is power. He is an influential man in Old
Hrolmar’s underworld, but with time he hopes to
supplant Pascule and become the cult’s second in
command; already Emilio is considering ways in which
his rival could be eliminated without arousing suspicion
of his involvement. He would be quick to seize any
opportunity for advancement that fate offered him, or to
use the adventurers as his pawns.
The combination of his fiendish intellect, his ambition,
and his position at the centre of an international web of
criminal agents makes Emilio Sinniser one of the most
potent and dangerous opponents the adventurers will
ever face.
CHAOS 42, BALANCE 11, LAW 12
STR 17, CON 18, SIZ 16, INT 18, POW 16, DEX 9,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 17 ARMOUR: Sea Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 95% 1d8+1+db
Heavy Mace 78% 1d8+2+db
Dagger 85% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 90% 1d3+db
SPELLS: Bonds Unbreakable (3), Buzzard Eyes (1),
Demon’s Ear (1), Hell’s Razor (1-4), Undo Magic (1-4),
Ward (3), Witch Sight (3)
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: One Qalaqutos demon,
bound into an amulet worn on a string of beads around
his thick neck
SKILLS: Bargain 87%, Conceal Object 55%, Disguise
80%, Dodge 62%, Evaluate 86%, Fast Talk 65%, Hide
78%, Insight 50%, Listen 63%, Million Spheres 05%,
Move Quietly 40%, Natural World 25%, Oratory 38%,
Own Language (Common) 80%, Sailing 75%, Scribe 60%,
Young Kingdoms 34%
MALVIANCE EMILO’S GREATER DEMON
AMULET
It (Breed Qalaqutos) has the appearance of a small,
surprisingly heavy amulet of some dark stone, carved in
the shape of a crouched beast. Its weathered lines make
the creature’s species impossible to determine but
anyone examining it closely will, with a successful Search
roll, feel certain the beast it represents is poised to
attack. An Evaluate roll suggests that, judging by how
blurred the carving has become, the amulet is ancient,
but will not identify the heavy stone it is carved from. A
tiny eight-pointed star is carved on the amulet-creature’s
head, but this can only be detected by a critical Search
roll; otherwise it appears to be a faint tracery of spidery
cracks.
STR 16, INT 15, POW 15, CON 11
ABILITIES: Teleport (Able To Teleport Emilio Anywhere
In The Young Kingdoms At The Cost Of 1 Point Of Pow;
When Its Pow Is Reduced To Zero The Amulet Crumbles
Into Dust And The Demon Perishes)
NEED: To be soaked in quicksilver (liquid mercury)
within a day of employing its ability
WAREHOUSES
Numerous warehouses, some of timber, some
more sturdily constructed of sandstone, line a
number of the Quayside streets. The many goods
imported and exported through the harbour are
stored here prior to being loaded onto a ship or
being delivered to market or a merchant’s shop.
Petty theft is common from many of these
warehouses, although it is not as endemic as
some merchants claim.
TEMPLE OF LAW
This six storeyed pyramid of stained glass is
dedicated to Lord Elgis the Gentle. The temple’s
outer walls are carefully built of countless small
panes of thick, hand-coloured glass from
Galeazzo in Ilmiora, set amid just as many lead 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 75 -
frames. The internal supports are of stone, which
rise up from its polished wooden floors. An open
central shaft runs through the centre of the
pyramid, ringed about by a waist-high balustrade
at every floor, over which curious visitors can
peer down to the central sanctum far below.
Broad wooden stairs connect every level.
Pilgrims come here from all over the world
to pray to Elgis, while yet others come to just
marvel at the beauty of the temple, which is
quite rightfully one of the seven wonders of the
Young Kingdoms. On bright days the interior of
the temple is painted with pools of scarlet,
emerald and amber light as the sunshine beams
through the stained-glass walls.
The temple is home to one of the largest
choirs in the Young Kingdoms, whose harmonies
are said to bring momentary enlightenment to all
who hear them, while a monumental pneumatic
pipe organ, constructed by the artisan-priests of
Arkyn, dominates the cathedral’s first floor.
Chancellor Helforth is the high priest of
Elgis, and despite his age, his sermons
concerning peace and humanity’s higher
purpose in a chaotic world remain concise and
illuminating. Chief Administrator Vellon,
Helforth’s nominated successor, frets about the
laxity of Duke Avan’s rule, and vows that things
will change once he is Chancellor, although for
the present the temple’s daily affairs are his main
concern. Meanwhile, the ambitious priest of
Elgis and former diplomat, Administrator
Corunna, Vellon’s main rival, makes his own
plans for power in the pyramid’s shadows as the
Chancellor’s death draws nearer.
Behind the scenes Administrator Uthos, a
priest of Tovik, oversees temple security and
studies his peers and rivals with a flinty eye,
while Administrator Satigo, the city’s chief judge
and a priest of Donblas, quietly observes all that
unfolds and keeps his own counsel.
The following descriptions detail some of
the more interesting aspects of the temple.
FIRST FLOOR
From the town square, great polished doors of
beaten bronze open into the temple, guarded
night and day by warrior-priests from the order
of Donblas. The temple’s white marble floor has
been polished smooth by the countless feet of
those who enter and exit the glass pyramid on a
daily basis.
SANCTUM
The heart of the pyramid is the great temple of
Elgis. A giant marble statue of the Lord of Law,
some 30 feet high, stands on a circular dais at
the centre of the room, its carven arms raised
and its head tilted back, smiling beatifically up
towards the pyramid’s peak. Sunlight shines
down upon the statue from the central light well
above, and through the stained glass outer walls
of the pyramid.
The northern wall of the sanctum is
dominated by the vast pipes of the pneumatic
organ, flanked to the left and right by intricately
carved rows of wooden stalls, partially enclosed
and raised 20 feet above the floor, from which
the choir sing the praises of their god. When the
choir here is in full voice, coupled with the
sonorous blasts of the pipe organ, the whole
temple vibrates in harmony with their song.
SECOND FLOOR
LAW COURTS
Here, dappled by sunlight shining through the
walls of stained glass, the silver-robed priests of
Donblas sit in judgement over the city’s
criminals. If convicted of a secular crime the
guilty party is marched away to the city gaol,
across the river in Hilltown. Those found guilty
of heresy or treason are held in the gaol for a
short time before being executed or sent to the
salt mines in Dolgar. During the day the faint
prayers of the faithful drift up through the lightwell
from the sanctum below.
MEETING ROOMS
A number of small meeting rooms are also found
on this level, used by the various sects to discuss
their respective Chancellor’s latest orders, as
well as to debate the finer points of doctrine and
philosophy. If required, the silver-robed warriorpriests
of Donblas escortvisitors to the temple to
these rooms, although the chancellor holds most
of his discussions in his private chambers. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 76 -
THIRD FLOOR
LIBRARY
Occupying the entire third floor, this repository
of hand-written scrolls and newly printed books
contains the history of the church, the wisdom of
Law, the history of Vilmir and Old Hrolmar, and
other notable works on a varietyof subjects.
Purple-robed priests of Vallyn catalogue and
study these works, and anxiously watch over
anyone who is permitted to study here.
Bookcases and desks ring the light well in
concentric rows.
FOURTH FLOOR
DINING HALL
This large, communal dining room is home to
rows of heavy wooden tables and benches,
which seat the priests three times a day. A head
table stands on a small dais at the northern end
of the room, and seats the chancellor and
administrators, as well as any important guests
they may be entertaining.
KITCHENS
Large, bustling kitchens flank the dining room,
with the two separated by a wide corridor. With
fires carefully tended, and great copper pots
constantly on the boil, the air here is redolent
with simple but delicious foodstuffs, which are
prepared by a small army of servants and lowly
acolytes.
FIFTH FLOOR
PRIESTS’ CELLS
Occupying most of the entire fourth floor of the
temple, these small, spartan rooms (known as
cells) are the monks’ and priests sleeping
chambers,. The innermost rooms are windowless
and claustrophobic and are unsurpringly, the
quarters of the more junior clergy, with the more
important priests allocated rooms on the edges of
the building, looking out over the city. Each
room consists of a thin mattress and an even
thinner blanket, a water jug and bedpan, and
whatever small personal effects individual priests
may own.
SIXTH FLOOR
Few outsiders have seen the sixth floor of the
temple, where the Chancellor of Elgis and his
chief administrators have their private chambers,
although both Duke Avan is a frequent visitor, as
was his father before him. Elite warrior-priests of
Donblas guard the stairs and doors both leading
to and within this level, ensuring that only
invited guests are permitted.
CHANCELLOR HELFORTH’S
CHAMBERS
Featuring filigree candelabra of beaten gold and
silver, mahogany tables and rich carpets, these
richly appointed rooms occupy most of the sixth
floor. From here the chancellor can look out
over the city or down the light well to the
sanctum below, and onto the smiling face of his
god.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATORS’ ROOMS
Although less grand than those of the chancellor,
the private chambers of Chief Administrators
Velon, Uthos and Hugo are still lushy appointed,
and in stark contrast to the rooms of the lesser
priests on the floor below. Each room is
decorated predominantly in the colours
associated with the chief administrators’ sect;
thus Velon’s room is decorated in shades of
russet and fawn, Uthos’ chambers are dominated
by scarlet drapes and carmine carpets, and cold
Hugo’s apartments are draped with cloth-ofsilver.

BASEMENT
The pyramid of Elgis is built upon the ruins of an
ancient Melnibonéan palace, and its lower levels
were once the citadel’s cellars (in some rooms
the intoxicating scent of fabulous wines long
since drunk still lingers and rumour has it that
other spirits linger here also). The cellar
stonework is noticeably finer that anywhere else
in the city, while the floors are paved in chipped
and scuffed tiles of opal and lapus lazuli. These
rooms and passageways are lit by guttering 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 77 -
torches, which must be changed regularly. It is
possible that a concealed entrance somewhere
in the basement leads into the city’s sewers, but
if this is the case, none within the priesthood
have discovered it.
ARMOURY
The armoury holds the weapons used by the
temple guards - the red-robed warrior-priests of
Tovik, under the command of Administrator
Uthos. Sealed behind doors protected by spells
lie certain enchanted weapons that are only
brought out in times of desperate need.
BOILER ROOM
The furnace and boilers that heat the temple,
and which drive the mechanism for the pipe
organ in the sanctum above, are located behind
heavy doors in one corner of the basement.
STOREROOMS
The basement is also used for storing food and
other supplies for the temple, and is overseen by
yellow-robed priests of Goldar.
OUTSIDE THE CITY
Several significant locations exist outside Old
Hrolmar proper, and these are detailed below.
CEMETERY
Immediately to the east of the city, and protected
by low sandstone walls, stands Old Hrolmar’s
crowded cemetery. Here the bodies of the rich
lie in ostentatious vaults, while the poor are
buried one atop the other in crowded and
narrow graves.
A chapel to Mirath of the White Hands (in
the form of a small marble pyramid, thickly
garlanded with choking strands of ivy) stands in
the exact centre of the cemetery. A magnificent
statue of Mirath, who is depicted as stooping to
hold a goblet to a dying man’s lips (indicating
the blissful escape from pain that Mirath offers
all mortals) dominates the shadowed chamber
within the pyramid.
A veritable forest of tombstones and
avenues of ancient yew trees surround the
chapel, among them a stark and weathered
monument commemorating the countless dead
who succumbed to the Yellow Plague in 250 YK.
Traditionally those supplicants seeking the
assistance of the Mereghn’s assassins (see PLOTS
AND POWERS) leave notes or other tokens within
Mirath’s goblet as a means of securing the
order’s services. However, since Duke Avan
cracked down upon the Mereghn’s operations, a
new drop-point has been arranged, a crack in
the granite base of plague-commemorating
monument. It is now here that would-be patrons
leave slips of parchment bearing the names of
those they wish to have killed, or tokens
identifying both who they are and their wish for
the assassins to contact them directly.
Agents of the Mereghn monitor both
locations and are swift to contact those who seek
their services. Being a curiously honourable
guild, however, they will not always accept a
commission, no matter what price is offered, if
the job offends their order’s code.
Mirath’s priesthood tend to the cemetary’s
many tombs, and endeavours to feed the
wretched and homeless of Old Hrolmar who
seek shelter in the cemetery most nights. Of late
the priests have noted infrequent newcomers
visiting the cemetery: pale-faced foreigners, who,
in small groups, consult certain scrolls and
parchments as they walk around the grounds.
Having questioned these strangers, the
cemetery’s guardians have learned that they are
seeking the grave of an important leader of their
charitable order, who purportedly died in the
plague of 250 YK. Apparently the exact location
of his grave has since been lost, strangely the
visitors seem reticent to name this man, or the
order he founded, leaving the priests unable to
assist them in their quest. Still, as long as their
visitors are polite, and cause no trouble, the
priests are happy to let them go about their
business. (Further details about these visitors -
members of the Order of Endless Night - are
given in PLOTS AND POWERS).
CLAY PIT
Lying half a day’s ride to the east of the city, the
clay pit is the source of the raw material used to
build most of Old Hrolmar’s new homes and 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 78 -
buildings. This gaping pit has been worked for
centuries, and while it shows no signs of running
out, it expands every year. At its deepest point
lies a stagnant pool of emerald-coloured water
that some say is an entry to the kingdom of
Straasha, although most Hrolmarlians scoff at
such foolishness.
FARMS
Family-owned farms are typical of many small
properties outlying the city. Here, residents tithe
a quarter of every harvest to the duke and, in
times of war, all able bodied men, be they
among the farmer’s family or his serfs, can be
called up to fight for the duchy.
The standard farm consists of a large stone
farmhouse with whitewashed stonewalls and a
low, thatched roof. Often, a farmhouse’s rooms
have been extended several times over the
centuries. Additional outbuildings, including
barns, stables and huts for the workers, surround
their muddy yards, while chickens and ducks
wander the grounds and herds of cattle or goats
graze in the fields beyond. All farmers grow their
own crops, which include fields of tomatoes,
onions, saffron, cotton, wheat and barley.
Unsurprisingly, an array of strapping
farmhands and voluptuous milkmaids call such
farms their home.
THE OLD QULEMA ESTATE
This unwelcoming mansion, its windows
permanently shuttered and its extensive grounds
overgrown, stands on a hilltop overlooking the
Jadmar road, a few miles north of the city.
Recently purchased by Baron Manyule Marinus,
after the death of the last surviving member of
the Qulema family, local gossip has it that this
former resident of Rignariom is no longer
welcome in his former home following some
undisclosed scandal (although precise reasons of
his exile – which some claim is voluntary – are
currently unknown).
A high brick wall topped with iron spikes
surrounds the estate; its wrought iron gates
padlocked and chained. Within, a curious
observer can glimpse a veritable riot of
vegetation that was once the well-manicured
lawns and neatly tended gardens of the estate.
Few observers linger at the gates for long,
however, for vicious mastiffs run free inside the
walls, although no human guards are to be seen.
Local farmers shun the Qulema estate, and
fall silent and pale if asked about Baron Marinus,
while travellers passing by the mansion late at
night say that they have heard dreadful shrieks
and howls emanating from within the mansion’s
darkened halls.
BARON MANYULE MARINUS
MAD SCIENTIST, AGE 47
Standing an imposing 6’4”, Baron Marinus is an
impressive, almost menacing figure. His pale face is
angular and gaunt, and heavy brows shadow his burning
black eyes. His black hair is shot through with white
streaks at each temple. Like most Vilmirian noblemen he
goes clean-shaven. He speaks in a deep, resonant voice;
is obsessive about his privacy; and refuses to see most
visitors. He rarely visits Old Hrolmar, preferring to
dispatch his squat and sullen servants to run his errands
for him.
Baron Marinus is a fanatical devotee of Arkyn, and a
scientist and inventor of great skill. More than once he
has ventured into the Forest of Troos, returning with
fragments of strange and marvellous machines (which
today gather dust in the halls of his mansion) as well as
with the faithful, demi-human servants that attend his
every need.
Previously obsessed with solving the secret of the
Doomed Folk and their lost secrets, the baron abandoned
his previous studies almost a decade ago, in order to
focus his intellect upon a single goal: a quest to perfect
the Vilmirian race through a combination of eugenics and
vivisection. To this end he has grafted flesh with metal,
sewn body parts together in dreadful new combinations,
bred hideous and beautiful hybrids, and sought to bring
life to inert tissue; all in order to create a master race.
It goes without saying that the baron is deranged, but he
is also urbane, well bred, and possessed of a keen
intelligence. He would make a deadly adversary were his
solitude and his studies ever to be interrupted.
CHAOS 21, BALANCE 18, LAW 47
STR 13, CON 09, SIZ 18, INT 21, POW 16, DEX 13,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 79% 1d8+1+db
Scapel 85% 1d4+db
SPELLS: Heal (2), Make Fast (1)
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: None
SKILLS: Craft (Vivisection) 105%, Natural World 78%,
Repair/Devise 110%, Scribe 70%, Young Kingdoms 40%
THURG OF ORG
BESTIAL SERVANT, AGE 30
The most intelligent of the baron’s semi-human servants
is Thurg, a squat, hairy, powerfully built man with a 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 79 -
shambling gait and simian features. He serves Baron
Marinus out of fear, not loyalty. His fellow Orgian
servants hate Thurg, as he beats them without mercy or
provocation in order to maintain his power over them.
CHAOS 43, BALANCE 29, LAW 37
STR 19, CON 21, SIZ 15, INT 08, POW 08, DEX 12,
APP 03
HIT POINTS: 18 ARMOUR: Naturally thick
bone and deep muscle 1D6
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 105% 1d3+db
Cleaver 95% 1d8+db
Large Club 88% 1d8+db
SKILLS: Dodge 66%, Hide 70%, Hate Master 150%,
Intimidate Others 85%, Jump 50%, Move Quietly 90%,
Search 61%, Track 85%, Trap 75%
LIGHTHOUSE
A day’s ride southwest of the city, at the tip of a
rocky promontory known as Dragon Point,
stands a squat sandstone lighthouse. Its beacon
burns every night to provide a guiding light for
ships sailing along the rocky Vilmirian coast. Last
century the lighthouse keeper and his entire
family disappeared on a foggy winter’s night, a
mystery that has never been explained.
ORCHARDS AND VINEYARDS
Many fine orange orchards and vineyards
surround Old Hrolmar, while the entire duchy is
also dotted with gnarled groves of olive trees. A
robust and well-rounded Cabernet Sauvignon is
bottled at many of the local wineries. The 387
YK vintage is widely regarded as the best wine
that has been bottled in the region in living
memory.
QUARRY
Two days ride to the west, on the border of
Dolgar, lies the quarry from which much of Old
Hrolmar’s sandstone originates. Many of the
city’s worst criminals are sent here to labour with
picks and chisels, ponderously carving out raw
blocks of stone that are then shipped back to the
city’s stonemasons.
ST NALDO’S ASYLUM FOR THE
INSANE
Nestled in an idyllic bend of the river, half a
day’s ride to the north of Old Hrolmar, stands
the asylum of St Naldo. Established several years
ago at the behest of Duke Avan, this austere
building houses Old Hrolmar’s crazed and
insane, who, prior to its existence, were cast out
onto the streets to live or die as fate willed.
The asylum, named after an obscure
Ilmioran saint whose touch restored the sanity of
the deranged, is maintained by an Ilmioran
religious order led by Administrator Ludovico
Forli, a priest of Vallyn. A range of alleged
treatments are employed to try and cure the
lunatics who reside here, including hydrotherapy
and fever induction for the wealthy, and
lobotomies for the poor. Those who are
considered to be beyond help are chained in
cells on the upper floors and at night the
surrounding countryside echoes with their
shrieks and cries.
Unknown to all save a handful of his most
trusted assistants, Administrator Forli is using his
position to experiment with radical new cures for
the illnesses that plague the asylum’s residence.
These include primative surgeries (under the
assumption that certain organs such as the
ovaries and lymph nodes may have a harmful
effect on certain individuals’ mental states), as
well as more esoteric treatments based on an
ancient Melnibonéan scroll that has come into
the administrator’s possession.
Due to his inept translation of this
document, the priest believes that the text
describes humanity’s different states of mind,
when it actually describes different planes of
existence. The scroll also displays the plans of a
curious machine that Administrator Forli believes
will generate some kind of healing aura, and
which he is presently clumsily trying to
construct.
 Unfortunately, the plans are not what Forli
believes them to be. The resulting machine,
which is almost completed, will have the
catastrophic potential to breach the barriers
between the spheres, rather than help the mad
regain their reason. Although originally
designed to create gateways between worlds, the
flawed machine which Forli is unwittingly
building has the potential to unravel the very 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 80 -
fabric of the Multiverse; and once it is switched
on, it will be almost impossible to turn off.
THE MYSTERIOUS PATIENT
Safely locked away behind St Naldo’s bars is a
patient who was delivered to the asylum two
years ago. He was found wandering through Old
Hrolmar, stopping people in the streets and
explaining to them in a calm, reasonable,
although curiously accented voice that they
should not exist, as they had, according to him,
died some years previously. Although calm, he is
prone to fits of wild melancholy, but he is not a
violent man.
The patient calls himself Jared Karnaleen,
and claims to be from a city called Marrabel,
although no such place is known to exist (unless
perhaps it lies in the Unmapped East). When his
fits befall him the gaunt and bearded Karnaleen
mumbles about lands unknown to even the
wisest of scholars – Mirenberg, Muskovia,
Garathorm, Rowenarc – and bemoans that he
has lost the world he knew and now lives only in
its sad and pale reflection.
In his rare moments of lucidity Jared
Karnaleen is clearly an educated man. He is an
excellent chess player, speaks several languages
(most of them entirely unknown to even the
wisest of scholars) and is an adept
mathematician. He has become something of a
celebrity in Old Hrolmar, with a number of the
city’s important residents paying him visits at the
asylum. Even Duke Avan has called upon the
madman, and seemed much taken by his fanciful
imaginings.
JARED KARNALEEN
TEMPORAL ADVENTURER, AGE 27
This pale young man - his gaunt face and haunted blue
eyes framed by a black beard and wild mop of hair - has,
for more years than he cares to remember, been a nomad
of the Time Streams. He was once a poet and a dreamer;
a citizen of tranquil Marrabel, in the lake district of
Kalvania; and engaged to be married to the beautiful
Miss Mina Hazard of that same city.
Sadly Kalvania was invaded and conquered by the armies
of Angerland, a warlike nation ruled by the ambitious
sorcerer-scientist King Victor III (also known as ‘the
Virgin King’ because each of his five wives killed
themselves on their wedding nights rather than sleep
with him). Understandably the invasion cast more than
just Jared and Mina’s wedding plans into disarray. Jared
threw his lot in with the Kalvanian Resistance, and over
the following three years he became famous – or
infamous, depending on who was telling the tales – for
his deeds against the Angerlandians. One fateful winter
evening, Jared was captured by King Victor’s deathless
clockwork knights. Jared’s trial was brief; King Victor’s
punishment was cruel and unusual.
Rather than execute Jared and risk making him a martyr,
King Victor exiled the young revolutionary, not just from
Kalvania, but from the world. Strange, magical machines
that the king himself had constructed ruptured the
barriers between the spheres and Jared was cast out into
whatever lay outside his world.
Since that day Jared Karnaleen has been flung at random
from plane to plane and back and forth along the
Timestream, a victim of the Morphail Effect (which
bedevils all time travellers) as well as Fate or some other
force beyond his ken. At irregular intervals, usually just
after Jared has found something resembling peace with a
woman who reminds him of his lost love, the spheres
spin again and he is once more hurtled through space
and time. The cumulative effect upon his mind has been
considerable, and Jared is now plagued by partial
amnesia and multiple and conflicting memories.
In recent months, following his incarceration in St
Naldo’s Asylum, he has developed the nagging sensation
that he has seen the ‘sanity machine’ currently being
constructed by Administrator Ludovico Forli somewhere
before. During his brief moments of reason, Jared offers
the Ilmioran priest every possible assistance to ensure
that the machine can be completed. Somehow Jared
knows that the device may be the key to his sanity,
although he is unsure what secrets it will actually unlock.
If necessary he will fight to see the machine finished. If
he could somehow be alerted to the devastation it will
wreak – not just on the Young Kingdoms but every
neighbouring plane once operational - Jared would be
only too quick to aid in its destruction, even though
without the device it is unlikely he will ever return to
Kalvania and Miss Mina Hazard.
NOTABLE SKILLS: Haunted Look 92%, Hide 86%,
Laugh Disturbingly 100%, Mechanical Repair 77%, Million
Spheres 45%/90%*, Own Language (Kalvanian) 120%,
Other Language (Common) 45%, Own Language
(Angerlandish) 74%, Young Kingdoms 02%, Needlegun
110% (Damage 1d10) Brawl 65%,
* This first figure represents Jared’s usual knowledge of
the Million Spheres, while the second is his actual
knowledge of the Multiverse when sane.
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 81 -
S
ENCOUNTERS
OME TEN THOUSAND PEOPLE call Old
Hrolmar home, while countless others pass
through its gates every year. From across
the Young Kingdoms they come: merchants,
mercanaries, artisans and adventurers, drawn by
the promise of wealth and opportunity, and
swelling the already crowded streets of the city.
This chapter presents an Encounter Table
designed to help the Gamemaster bring Old
Hrolmar to life by means of chance meetings
with its many and varied inhabitants. As well as
providing atmosphere and local colour, these
entries might suggest new possibilities for future
scenarios to the Gamemaster, or introduce rich
role-playing opportunities to the campaign in the
form of potential new employers, enemies,
lovers or friends. Such encounters also offer the
Gamemaster a means by which to nudge a
scenario back on track if the adventurers have
gone off after a red herring.
Should statistics are needed for any of the
non-player characters described in these
encounters, the Gamemaster is referred to the
HROLMARLIAN DIGEST, and also the Young
Kingdoms Digest on pages 221-228 of the
Stormbringer rulebook.
ENCOUNTERS IN OLD
HROLMAR
See the table on the following page for a D100
summary of thse encounters.
• Duke Avan Alone: The hereditary ruler of
Old Hrolmar is not one for following
convention, and often walks the streets freely
- sometimes openly, sometimes disguised.
His motivations for doing so are many: he
might be seeking to gauge his people’s
opinions of the changes sweeping Old
Hrolmar; have a craving for a simple
pleasure, such as a glass of wine and a game
of dice in a homely tavern; or wish to swap
stories of bold deeds and dangerous
undertakings.
• Duke Avan and Retinue: Accompanied by
bodyguards, courtiers and servants, Duke
Avan Astran walks the streets of Old
Hrolmar. He might be travelling to a public
forum where he can listen to the pleas and
petitions of the townsfolk, or preparing to
welcome a foreign dignitary. Perhaps he is
officiating at a ship’s launch or the opening
of a new building; or embarking on another
Elric bent to raise her to her feet.
She screamed. Her painted eyes widened. He stared at her in astonishment and
then, following her gaze, turned and saw the pack of bravos who had stolen
round the corner and were now rushing at himself and Moonglum. Behind the
bravos Elric thought he saw the young dandy he had earlier chased from the
tavern. The dandy wished for revenge.
 THE VANISHING TOWER, II, II
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 82 -
grand adventure; or is about to preside over
a public ceremony, such as a wedding
between two noble houses. Perhaps he is on
his way to bestow land and titles upon those
who have pleased him, or bound for the
Vilmirian capital and an audience with the
king. If the adventurers have shared a drink
with the Duke when he was incognito, Avan
may even acknowledge them with a grin and
a wink before returning to the task at
hand.
• Chancellor and Retinue: Clad in stately
robes of brown velvet trimmed with
golden thread, the aging Chancellor
Helforth, high priest of Elgis of Law,
makes his way slowly across the city in a
litter carried by impassive servants. He is
accompanied by a retinue of warriorpriests
of Tovik and various notaries,
scribes and servents. The Chancellor
may be enacting a ritual, visiting a
friend, or simply taking in the air. His
milky eyes might alight on the
adventurers, or if he is preoccupied with
matters relating to the Cosmic Struggle,
he may look straight through them.
• Priests of Law: 1D6 priests of Law going
about their business. They may be
embarking on a pilgrimage, preaching in
the streets, recruiting new followers, or
carrying out their sacred obligations.
Perhaps they are adherents of the
demigod T’aargano, whose sect is weak
in Old Hrolmar; or priests of Goldar
searching for counterfitters; or even
black-robed priests of Theril trying to
inspire a crusade to cleanse Nadsokor.
• Champion: A Champion of Law or
Chaos, dedicated to serving their deity’s
will, and unswerving in his or her duty.
A Champion may be upon a quest, or
just passing through the city. Maybe the
Champion will try and hire the
adventurers to aid in some noble or
dastardly task, or perhaps he or she is
stalking the adventurers, seeking
revenge for a real or imagined slight
against the god they loyally serve.
• Noble and Retinue: The adventurers
encounter a member of Old Hrolmar’s
nobility. He or she could be young,
vibrant, and accompanied by a group of
1D6 rowdy companions; or mature and
staid, and escorted by 1D6 bodyguards.
Such nobles might be rallying against Duke
Avan, and seeking to recruit the adventurers
to their cause; or have fervently embraced
the changes Avan’s rule has brought to Old
Hrolmar and eager for the company of
exotic or well-travelled individuals. The
noble may be aloof, refusing to speak to
ENCOUNTERS IN OLD HROLMAR
1D100 ENCOUNTER
01-02 Duke Avan Alone
03-04 Duke Avan and Retinue
05 Chancellor and Retinue
06-13 Priests of Law
14 Champion
15-20 Vilmirian Noble and Retinue
21 Inquisitor
22-30 Merchant
31 Corpse
32-35 Foreign Noble and Retinue
36-37 Foreign Noble Alone
38-40 Barbarian
41 Sorcerer
42-43 Artist
44-45 Smugglers
46-50 Sailors
51-65 Grey Defenders
66-70 Legionnaires
71-75 Peasant
76 Scholar
77 Prostitute
78 Shopkeeper
79-90 Townsperson
91-92 Fisherman
93 Thief
94 Beggar
95 Street Gang
96 Press Gang
97 Elemental
98 Demon
99 Special Event
00 No Encounter 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 83 -
anyone not of his station and
communicating with commoners only
through his underlings. Possibly she is
outgoing and helpful, willing to share her
knowledge of the city and current events
over a fine meal and a bottle or two of wine.
• Inquisitor: One of the most dangerous
individuals in Old Hrolmar, this fanatical
devotee of Donblas of Law is dedicated to
rooting out Chaos wherever it nests. He is
constantly on watch for signs of heresy, and
is quick to note any suspect behaviour: in his
eyes something as innocent as loudly
laughing in public is a sign of potential
corruption. If given cause to suspect the
adventurers of heresy he will not rest until
they are have been placed on trial for
heresy, executed, or proven innocent
beyond all reasonable doubts. The only laws
he obeys are those of the White Lords; he
will not shirk from torture or murder should
he deem them necessary to the completion
of his duties.
• Merchant: Ever since Duke Avan took the
throne, merchants from all points of the
Young Kingdoms have flocked to Old
Hrolmar. This merchant might be a local or
a foreigner; wealthy, struggling, desperate,
corrupt, boastful, successful, in league with
Chaos, or just starting out in the daunting
world of trade. He might need bodyguards,
porters or runners and offer the adventurers
good money for their services. Alternatively,
he might have almost any item imaginable
for sale in his stall, shop, or on his person.
Perhaps he is on his way to an important
meeting; or he might have just been robbed
and be in desperate need of assistance;
maybe he mistakes the adventurers for the
lackeys of his greatest rival.
• Corpse: A dead body or a part thereof. It
might be that of a murder victim whose killer
still lurks nearby. The deceased might have
died of exposure or from an accident, and
their family might be willing to reward
anyone who returns the corpse for proper
burial. Perhaps the body was someone who
was sacrificed to Chaos, and something on
or about the corpse provides a clue to
unmasking the cult’s ringleaders.
• Foreign Noble and Retinue: A dignitary from
another land accompanied by liveried
guards, and slaves or servants. A decadent
Argimilian, an arrogant Lormyrian, or a hotblooded
Jharkorian; perhaps even a
Melnibonéan noblewoman on a quest to
unravel the mysteries she has glimpsed in
drug-fuelled dreams; or a dignified Myyrrhn
who pretends not to notice the stares he
attracts from most Vilmirians. A foreign
noble may need translators, local guides, or
simply good company. They might provide
the adventurers with an introduction to
Vilmirian high society, or involve them in a
diabolic scheme from which they barely
escape with their lives.
• Foreign Noble Alone: As above, except the
noble travels without companions – They
may be an exile seeking to clear their
blackened name, or hoping to raise an army
with which to reclaim their usurped throne.
They might be seeking enlightenment,
revenge upon a fleeing adversary, or simply
new adventures in strange lands. They may
wish to keep their social status secret, or
revel in lavish displays of wealth and power.
If the latter, the adventurers may be all that
saves the noble from being robbed - and
possibly killed - in one of Old Hrolmar’s less
reputable taverns. Of course, whether the
noble is properly grateful for being rescued,
or take such deeds for granted, depends
entirely upon the Gamemaster.
• Barbarian: Be they a ritually-scarred
inhabitant of the Weeping Waste wrapped in
leather and furs; a white-robed, ebonskinned
stranger from the Sighing Desert; or
a slow-witted tribesman from Org or Yu, this
barbarian’s distaste for city life is obvious to
all but the least perceptive of adventurers. A
barbarian may be drawn to foreign-born
adventurers, recognising them as likeminded
souls; or may seek to befriend an
adventurer before stealing everything they
own and absconding to another city.
• Sorcerer: Practitioners of magic are hated
and feared in Vilmir, even in cosmopolitan
Old Hrolmar. This individual is probably a
servant of Chaos, although it is possible that
their sorcery is more benign, and attuned to
one of the Elemental Rulers. They might
need assistants to guard them while they
enact some powerful summoning, or want a
grimoire stolen from a rival’s library. Maybe 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 84 -
the sorcerer seeks bodyguards to accompany
him or her to a nearby city, but neglects to
mention that it lies on a neighbouring plane.
The sorcerer may covet an adventurer’s
possessions, or even their soul.
• Artist: A sculptor, a painter, a master of
mosaics, a respected calligrapher and
illuminator of manuscripts, or perhaps a
musician. An artist might be native to Vilmir,
but is more likely a foreigner drawn to the
city by its burgeoning reputation. They may
be looking for a patron, a muse, a model or
entertainment.
• Smugglers: Devious men and women in
league with the cult of Slortar, but not
necessarily active worshippers of Chaos.
These criminals know numerous secret
routes about the city through which they
transport drugs, Arveed, and other
contraband. The adventurers may stumble
upon their cache of black-market goods
while the smugglers are absent, or catch
them at their trade red-handed. Alternatively
the smugglers may try to use the adventurers
as couriers, asking them to help transport a
seemingly innocuous package (‘a gift for my
father’) across the city or out of Vilmir.
• Sailors: These men are mostly likely making
the most of their brief spell ashore,
carousing, wenching and drinking with
gusto. They may be looking for a fight, or
have valuable souvenirs of their travels that
they wish to trade. Sailors can be a source of
trouble or of information. They might be
allied with smugglers, or worshippers of
strange gods, or just looking for a good time.
• Grey Defenders: The Grey Defenders uphold
Vilmir’s civil laws and police its cities. They
share a fierce rivalry with the Vilmirian
legions, and Duke Avan is often at pains to
maintain the peace between their ranks.
Small bands of Grey Defenders patrol Old
Hrolmar’s streets day and night, on the
lookout for thieves, villains and vagabonds,
while at night their bobbing lanterns provide
a reasuring light in the otherwise stygian
streets.
• Legionnaires: Harshly disciplined men of the
Vilmirian legions, many of them conscripts,
who guard the nation from external threats
and ensure that King Naclon’s rule over the
neighbouring Vilmirian Protectorates is
firmly maintained. Legionnaires are
contemptuous of Duke Avan and his
decadent rule, and this disrespect extends to
most of his citizens. They have little formal
authority in Old Hrolmar, but this rarely
stops them from throwing their weight
around. Adventurers may encounter the
legionnaires marching through the city on
their way to the Protectorates; bullying a
hapless peasant or shopkeeper; or trying to
stare down a squad of Grey Defenders.
• Peasant: A worker from an outlying farm,
who has come into town to sell their wares
and take in the sights. They may be lost,
have been robbed, or simply be overawed
by the size of the city and its crowds.
Perhaps they are escaping from a cruel
master, or seek refuge in the city after fleeing
arrest for some petty crime.
• Scholar: A learned individual, a humble
scribe, a poet or a philosopher. He or she
may seek stimulating conversation or
employment, or might have specific
questions about an adventurer’s homeland
and customs.
• Prostitute: A “working” woman, perhaps
based near the docks, or in New Hrolmar, or
at one of the many brothels in Rose Street in
the Merchants’ District. She might seek
information about a particular sailor or
guildsman; may have valuable information
about corruption in high places to sell to the
right buyer; or might try to charm the
adventurers into ridding her of a
troublesome client. Perhaps she is simply
looking for paying customers.
• Shopkeeper: A minor merchant whose stall
is his only livelihood. Perhaps he has a
bargain for the adventurers: a scroll, a
dagger, even a mysterious carving from
distant lands. His prattling might serve
merely as a distraction while his partner, a
thief, steals the adventurers’ purses. Maybe
he needs someone to mind his stall for a
moment, and while he is gone an aggressive
debt collector arrives demanding payment
for an old loan.
• Townsperson: A “normal” city resident who
is perhaps in need of the adventurers’
assistance. A merchant has swindled them, a
street gang has menaced them, or a dark
presence is haunting their home. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 85 -
• Fisherman: This resident of Quayside may
have entered the city to sell his latest catch,
or perhaps he urgently seeks someone in
authority in order to warn them of a foreign
fleet he has glimpsed on the horizon. He
might be a drunkard, willing to swap tales of
sea serpents and treasure islands in return for
cups of wine. His wild stories might even be
true.
• Beggar: One of the beggars of Nadsokor:
blind or crippled or diseased. Perhaps he is
begging for food or alms while covertly
spying upon the adventurers or some enemy
of King Urish. Alternatively she may not be a
real beggar at all. Perhaps she is a Champion
of Law or the Balance, disguised and testing
the adventurers’ principles; or a foreign
visitor who has been robbed of all his
belongings and who implores the
adventurers for aid instead of alms.
• Thief: A professional thief going about her
trade. The adventurers may see her picking a
pocket or stealing goods. Is she truly
villainous, or simply starving and desperate?
Perhaps the adventurers are themselves the
targets of a thief, or they unwittingly
encounter a burglar in the act of casing a
potential crime scene? Maybe the thief
recognises the adventurers, and seeks to
settle an old score with them.
• Street Gang: A noisy group of bravos. They
might be adolescent boys, in which case
they make up in volume what they lack in
daring, or perhaps they are a group of older
gang members spoiling for a fight. Foreigners
might be their special target, or
unchaperoned women. Perhaps they are
drunk and mostly harmless, or perhaps not.
• Press Gang: A gang of thugs looking for new
recruits for the Vilmirian navy or other
vessels. Their victims are drugged or beaten
senseless and then handed over to a ship in
the harbour. They may have their eyes on
the adventurers, or one of the adventurers’
friends.
• Elemental: An elemental has escaped its
binding. It may be an air elemental, dancing
on the breeze and playfully blowing hats off
heads and goods off stalls; or a fire elemental
leaping from building to building and
spreading flames and havoc in its wake.
Perhaps it bears a whispered message from
its Elemental Ruler, who calls upon an
adventurer to aid them in some way on this
plane. Adventurers who slay an elemental
will win praise, unless they deploy sorcery to
defeat it.
• Demon: A monstrous demon, summoned by
a vindictive sorcerer or accidentally
unleashed by some renovation or
excavation, is on the rampage. Alternatively
the adventurers encounter someone
possessed by a demon, or discover an
unrecognised demon weapon or artefact for
sale at a market stall. Perhaps a demon
messenger with something important to
convey materialises before them.
• No Encounter: Are you sure? Perhaps there is
someone in the shadows, taking careful note
of the adventurers’ actions. Possibly they
have unwittingly drawn the attention of one
of the Higher Powers, a Lord of Law or a
Duke of Chaos, for whom the adventurers
will now become pawns or playthings.
Alternatively roll again, chose another
encounter at random, or do nothing; perhaps
the streets of Old Hrolmar really are quiet
today.
SPECIAL EVENTS
Presented here is a table of some unusual events
that may occur while the adventurers stay in Old
Hrolmar. Some are prosaic, some fantastic; all
hint at new scenarios that the Gamemaster is
invited to design.
The events table is designed to generate
activity on a monthly basis, but Gamemasters
should not feel compelled to follow it slavishly -
some events may precipitate others – riots or
plague may follow a flood, while witch-hunts
may follow the havoc wreaked by a rogue
demon and so on.
• Fire: A fire starts in a crowded section of the
city and quickly rages out of control. Are the
adventurers caught in a burning building?
Do they see trapped citizens and attempt a
rescue? Was the fire started by a careless
resident or is there something more sinister
or supernatural in its origin? Adventurers
who are friendly to Straasha may call for his
aid in the effort to extinguish the 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 86 -
conflagration, but risk attracting the attention
of the Inquisition in doing so.
• Building Collapse: The recent renovation of
the city has produced many large and
impressive building efforts. Ambitious
architects, vying against each other to win
patrons and renown, attempt ever more
extreme and risky projects. Consequently a
newly constructed spire, tower or entire
wing topples down into a busy street,
crushing those who are unfortunate enough
to be standing below. Help is sought to
release those survivors who are trapped in
the rubble. What has the fallen building
revealed? Treasures to be looted before the
authorities can take charge, or a secret room
long concealed?
• Sewer Collapse: One of the ancient tunnels
that lies beneath the city can no longer
support the weight of the buildings above,
and suddenly gives way. The only warning is
a low subterranean rumble before a gaping
hole opens in a busy street or inside a
building - perhaps even the common
room of the adventurers’ favourite tavern!
Animals, people and buildings fall
helplessly into the suddenly yawning gulf.
For any adventurers who fall into the
newly opened pit, the only way back to
the surface might be a trip though a dark
and dank maze. Who knows what long
lost secrets they might discover along the
way?
• Duel: The adventurers are witnesses to a
duel. It could be as trivial as two artists
fighting over accusations of plagiarism, or
two rich nobles fighting to the death over
the affections of a beautiful woman. Do
the adventurers know the duellists?
Perhaps an adventurer is hired to fight on
behalf of one of them. Perhaps they
witness cheating. Anyone for a bet?
• Brawl: Rising tensions between the
Vilmirian legionnaires and the Grey
Defenders results in a savage street brawl
between the two groups of armed men.
Alternatively, perhaps rival street gangs
meet to determine once and for all who
controls this section of the city. The
adventurers may witness such a fight from
a distance, or be caught up in its midst,
possibly resulting in injury, arrest, or a
case of mistaken identity when one of the
adventurers is entrusted with a desperate
message by a dying combatant.
• Caravan: A new caravan has recently arrived
at the city, carrying exotic wares from distant
lands. As a result, the adventurers may have
the opportunity to purchase rare goods, fine
weapons, or hear strange and enchanting
tales. Many strangers travel with the
caravans that trek across the Young
Kingdoms - what mystery and dangers have
arrived with this one?
• Reavers: A fleet of southern reavers from
Dorel or some other antagonistic nation
launch a dawn raid upon the city. Ships
caught at anchor are pillaged and sunk.
Spies open the gates, or lead groups of the
reavers though the sewers and into the city.
Vicious hand-to-hand fighting ensues in the
streets, and Quayside becomes a
conflagration. How will the adventurers fare
with their weapons in the hands of the Grey
Defenders?
SPECIAL EVENTS
1D100 EVENT
1-10 Fire
11-15 Building Collapse
16-20 Sewer Collapse
21-25 Duel
26-30 Brawl
31-45 Caravan
46 Reavers
47-50 Plague
51-55 Escaped Animal
56-58 Rogue Demon
59-60 Freak Weather
61-64 Royal Visit
65 Barbarian Horde
66-75 Public Execution
76-82 Witch Hunt
83-90 Riot
91-95 Festival
96-99 Circus
00 Special 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 87 -
• Plague: Rising from the sewers or brought by
travellers from across the seas, a plague
ravages the city. Gates are locked and a
curfew is enforced. Food is scarce. Riots may
ensue. The Glass Temple is closed and the
priests of Mirath traverse the city on a daily
basis, collecting bodies to be buried or
burned, and tending to those still alive. Has
the Yellow King risen again? Perhaps the
cure lies outside the city walls: within the illomened
Forest Of Troos or even on a
neighbouring plane. Escaped Animal: A
vicious and dangerous animal escapes from
the menagerie of a local noble, or perhaps
from the cages of a travelling circus. Was it
deliberately released? Can the adventurers
recapture it? They should be careful not to
kill it, as the owner may want recompense,
or a replacement.
• Rogue Demon: A series of horrific murders
across the city betrays the presence of a
rogue demon on the rampage. Who
summoned it and why? Unless the monster is
quickly killed or banished, the fear and
chaos it spreads will bolster the Inquisition’s
influence and undermine the freedoms
allowed by the duke.
• Freak Weather: A powerful storm ravages the
city, smashing ships against the quays,
ripping up trees and casting down buildings.
The river Hrol bursts its banks, causing
widespread flooding across the city. The
adventurers might be enlisted to help pack
and spread sandbags in an effort to slow the
floodwaters, or be called upon to aid in the
rescue of those caught in the spreading
torrent. Adventurers of a criminal persuasion
might take advantage of the ensuing disorder
and embark upon some opportunistic
looting. What – or who - has caused the
storm? Can the adventurers placate the
elements and save lives?
• Royal Visit: King Naclon of Vilmir visits the
city with much pomp and ceremony. The
streets swarm with folk eager to glimpse the
royal procession. Perhaps the adventurers
are hired as assassins and ordered to slay the
king, or conversely discover a plot to murder
him. The enemies of the crown are many:
disaffected nobles and the Forces of Chaos
are obvious foes, but the Church of Law’s
ruthless ambition may also play a role in
such machinations.
• Barbarian Horde: Sweeping down from the
Weeping Waste or out of the Sighing Desert,
a vast horde of marauding barbarians arrives
outside the city walls intent on sacking and
pillaging Old Hrolmar. How long can the
city hold out before the Vilmirian legions
arrive to drive them away? Will the
adventurers aid the attackers, or do they seek
to defend Old Hrolmar?
• Public Execution: The burning of heretics or
the beheading of a traitor, this event draws a
large crowd eager for entertainment and
bloodshed. Is the condemned party someone
the adventurers know, or are they hired to
stop it? Are they associated with the victim,
and if so, does the Inquisition know?
• Witch-Hunt: In Duke Avan’s absence,
paranoia grips the city as the Inquisition
presides over the latest hunt to root out the
forces of Chaos. The city gates are closed by
order of the Church, and house-to-house
searches are conducted. Foreigners are
targeted for special attention, can the
adventurers escape persecution, or do they
help in the search for mortal agents of
Entropy?
• Riot: Rioting has broken out in one of the
poorer quarters of town and has spread
rapidly to the other districts. Opportunities
for looting and thievery abound. Who started
the riots and why? Perhaps the adventurers
are asked to incite the riot, or they are forced
to defend life and property against an angry
mob.
• Festival: This may be a religious event, such
as Valario’s Day (16th Elordan), All God’s
Day (20th Montfath), Donblas’ Day (1st
Donblan) or the Day of the Dead (40th
Montfath). Perhaps it is a personal
celebration such as a wedding or a funeral?
Regardless of the nature of the event, it is a
time of high emotion and vibrant crowds.
• Circus: A caravan of colourful wagons,
festooned with bells, flags and bright
decorations, heralds the arrival of the circus.
For the next few days the citizens of Old
Hrolmar delight in the wonder and spectacle
provided by this outlandish troupe. But
beyond the excitement and pageantry, are
these performers really who they claim to 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 88 -
be? Are they spies for a coming invasion, or
secret adherents of Chaos wishing to further
the plans of their masters? Do thieves and
vagabonds travel with them? Perhaps one of
the adventurers embarks on a passionate
affair with one of the troupe and together the
pair is forced to decide what will they do
once the circus prepares to leave?
• Special: Something exceptionally unusual
and remarkable occurs. An eclipse casts the
city into darkness. A flight of dragons passes
low overhead and their dripping venom
accidentally sparks several accidental fires.
An angry mob besieges a house in the street,
baying for blood for some unknown crime. A
condemned thief’s companions stage a
daring rescue just as he is about to be
executed. Ashower of toads or blood rains
down on the city. A sorcerous explosion
vaporises a house and everyone in it,
temporarily opening a gateway to another
plane. Everyone in the city shares the same
dream on the same night. Elric of Melniboné
rides through the city on his way to some
unknown destination. Such events should
not occur without reason, and the
Gamemaster might wish to carefully
consider his or her choice before randomly
including such an event in their campaign. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 89 -
T
HROLMARLIAN
DIGEST
HIS CHAPTER PRESENTS a range of
sample statistics for the many residents and
visitors who crowd the streets of Old
Hrolmar. It is envisioned that these entries will
be most useful when used in conjunction with
the encounter tables provided in the previous
chapter, or when a Gamemaster requires further
information
on the
henchmen,
servants,
representative
s and general
‘hangers on’
of the characters appearing in THE GAZETTEER.
Many of the individuals and groups presented
below have additional adventure hooks included
as part of their background. Although no names
are given for these minor characters, should
names become necessary the Gamemaster is
directed towards the sidebar listing common
Hrolmarlian names that appears on Page 13 of
ORIENTATION.
COMMONERS
The crowded streets of Old Hrolmar swarm with
commoners; the salt of the earth and the
mainstay of the city. While some among them
embrace the changes Duke Avan has wrought,
others despise the influx of foreigners and
strange customs the duke has brought to the city.
Most live their lives unconcerned or ignorant of
the feuds and schemes of their masters.
ARCHITECT
This man’s posture and bearing are as stiff and formal as
the buildings he designs. Old Hrolmar’s extravagant new
architectural styles find no favour in his eyes, and
consequently he finds it increasingly difficult to gain
commissions from his formerly generous clients. The
architect leans
heavily on an
oaken walking
stick with which
he has been
known to beat
recalcitrant
builders. His
face is drawn,
his shoulders are tensed, and his lips are thin. His clothes
are fine but fraying, as are his nerves and disposition. An
impudent foreigner or a rude word in the street could
shatter his barely restrained temper, resulting in a public
fracas and perhaps an arrest at the hands of the Grey
Defenders.
CHAOS 17, BALANCE 18, LAW 37
STR 12, CON 14, SIZ 14, INT 15, POW 11, DEX 9,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Heavy Walking Stick 45% 1d6+db
SKILLS: Architecture 75%, Art (Drawing) 75%, Evaluate
35%, Own Language (Common) 75%, Scribe 65%
ARTISAN
This portly man is a wealthy member of a thriving guild.
His hands are callused and his muscles, although hidden
beneath a layer of fat, are still strong. He refuses to
believe that anyone born outside Vilmir is his intellectual
or physical equal, and will be unstintingly cruel to
anyone of foreign extraction who serves in his employ.
Standing beside Elric in the ship’s poop, Count
Smiorgan Baldhead wiped sweat from his pate and
growled: ‘Vilmirians are a lazy lot Prince Elric…’
THE SAILOR ON THE SEAS OF FATE, III, 1
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 90 -
He has a weakness for pastries, as evidenced by his
expanded waistline, and will grudgingly concede that
Filkharian chefs are possibly the equals of Vilmirians
(although only after a protracted argument).
CHAOS 21, BALANCE 12, LAW 30
STR 15, CON 16, SIZ 13, INT 12, POW 11, DEX 8,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 62% 1d4+db
SKILLS: Bargain 54%, Craft (As Suited) 65%, Listen 48%,
Scribe 15%
BUILDER
This robust young man recently helped conceal a murder
by burying the body in the foundations of the building
site on which he labours, in return for a purse of silver.
Although the act was criminal, his motives were for the
best - since his father’s death the young builder has
become his family’s sole breadwinner - and the illicit
money was sorely needed. Even so, he is wracked with
guilt and fears discovery. His shaggy head is bowed, his
eyes downcast, and his broad shoulders slumped. The
builder does not know whether the body he buried was
murdered by the smugglers, the Mereghn, or a Chaos
cult, and he dreads the day the truth is discovered. He
seeks avenues for redemptionthat perhaps the
adventurers can offer?
CHAOS 15, BALANCE 5, LAW 11
STR 14, CON 13, SIZ 16, INT 12, POW 10, DEX 12,
APP 14
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 75% 1d3+db
Sledgehammer 60% 1d8+db
SKILLS: Craft (Bricklaying) 53%, Fret 80%, Perspire
Nervously 65%
FACTORY WORKER
This gaunt, sallow woman has already lost one child to
the infernal machinery that was recently installed in the
mill in which she labours. Perhaps she plots vengeance
upon the callous owner, or seeks a kindly priest to
officiate at her child’s funeral. Perhaps she has overheard
an incriminating conversation between two fellow
workers, alluding to a secret shipment of contraband,
and is the unwitting key to cracking the smugglers’
gang. Regardless of the role Fate has in store for her, the
adventurers must first gain her trust and soothe her grief
before she can be of assistance to them.
CHAOS 13, BALANCE 22, LAW 19
STR 8, CON 11, SIZ 11, INT 13, POW 10, DEX 13,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 11 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Heart-breaking tears 65% None
Paring knife 45% 1d4+db
SKILLS: Bargain 64%, Craft (Weaving) 55%, Insight 50%,
Listen 63%
FARMHAND
This simple-natured lad has never been to a city before,
and gazes in wide-eyed wonder at everything he sees.
He would make an easy mark for unscrupulous locals,
although he carries only a handful of groats in his worn
leather purse. The farmhand is trusting, generous and
kind, although ignorant and unschooled. He would make
a faithful and loyal servant should he be given the
opportunity, although his lack of graces may be cause for
embarrassment in certain circles. He is surprisingly skilled
with a sickle, and fast on his feet for all his size.
CHAOS 5, BALANCE 12, LAW 19
STR 16, CON 14, SIZ 17, INT 10, POW 11, DEX 14,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 65% 1d3+db
Sickle 68% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 47% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Climb 55%, Craft (Whittling) 66%, Listen 50%,
Natural World 45%, Predict Weather 60%, Throw 63%,
Track 45%, Trap 40%
INNKEEPER
While he strives to keep a suitably stoic face, the
innkeeper’s intrinsically good nature and love of fine
wines means he is all too often loud and laughing, much
to his wife’s dismay. Only one topic casts a cloud over
his sunny features; lately word has reached the innkeeper
that his estranged younger brother has also become a
publican, and now manages a tavern in a distant land. If
the adventurers are natives of this country, or mention
that they have been travelled there, the innkeeper will
ply them with drinks and beg them to deliver a letter to
his brother. The source of the Innkeeper’s distress, the
contents of the letter, and the brother’s reaction to it, are
mysteries that only the Gamemaster can answer.
CHAOS 15, BALANCE 21, LAW 34
STR 13, CON 15, SIZ 12, INT 13, POW 9, DEX 10,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Timber Ace 45% 1d8+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 60%, Bargain 51%, Evaluate
68%, Scent/Taste 64%
REFUGEE
With her family farm in Rignariom consumed by the
Dinner-of-Dust, this young woman has walked the many
miles to Old Hrolmar in search of gainful employment.
Unusually for a Vilmirian woman she has been taught to
read. Possessing an intellect that will flower under the
right conditions, if befriended by the adventurers and
perhaps provided with a loan, a meal, or a roof over her 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 91 -
head, she may reappear months later in an influential
position; the trusted handmaiden of a noblewoman or a
powerful merchant’s scribe, able to assist the adventurers
with a valuable contact, or a word in the right ear.
CHAOS 10, BALANCE 31, LAW 26
STR 9, CON 10, SIZ 10, INT 17, POW 15, DEX 12,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 10 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 47% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Craft (Animal Husbandry) 65%, Insight 54%,
Listen 45%, Scribe 40%
CRIMINALS
In addition to the gangs and villains who lurk in
the Foreign Quarter (detailed in THE GAZETTEER)
the Gamemaster may wish to employ any of the
following criminals as supporting characters in
his or her adventures.
BURGLAR
When his parents were arrested for heresy by the Church
of Law, this sallow youth was forced onto a life of crime.
He is a quick and agile fellow with nimble fingers, a
stealthy tread, and sharp ears. He makes a living from
breaking into homes and businesses while the occupants
are sleeping or away, and stealing anything of value he
can find. He will not steal from the desperate and the
poor, and he delights in relieving the lords of the Church
of their property. Perhaps a vengeful sorcerer pursues
him, seeking a stolen amulet or maybe he tracks the
adventurers to their current domicile, planning to relieve
them of their valuables.
CHAOS 25, BALANCE 11, LAW 17
STR 9, CON 11, SIZ 10, INT 13, POW 16, DEX 17,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 11 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 47% 1d4+2+db
SPELLS: Cloak of Cran Liret (1-4), Moonrise (1),
Sureness of Cran Liret (1-4)
SKILLS: Climb 85%, Conceal Object 65%, Dodge 81%,
Hide 75%, Move Quietly 85%, Pick Lock 85%, Search
65%
FENCE
Although she appears to be the mousy wife of a
successful junk merchant, this woman is actually one of
the best fences in Old Hrolmar. With her wide network of
contacts she can usually find a buyer for the rarest and
most unusual of goods. Her many children act as her
eyes and ears, scouting out new buyers and ferrying
messages about the city. Every thief in Old Hrolmar
knows her name, and most have sold stolen goods to her
at some stage. Although she knows many of the city’s
smugglers, she prefers not to deal with them, and refers
their agents to less scrupulous fences should they ask to
meet with her.
CHAOS 27, BALANCE 13, LAW 29
STR 8, CON 13, SIZ 12, INT 14, POW 14, DEX 11,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Rolling Pin 65% 1d6+db
SKILLS: Bargain 88%, Conceal Object 65%, Evaluate
85%, Fast Talk 70%, Insight 47%, Young Kingdoms 33%
FOOTPAD
A surly, violent and unpleasant man whose mission in life
is to rob those weaker than himself, and then drink away
the proceeds. His teeth are rotten and his soul is black.
He cannot remember how many men he has robbed or
killed.
CHAOS 39, BALANCE 03, LAW 10
STR 13, CON 14, SIZ 13, INT 10, POW 9, DEX 11,
APP 8
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Sea Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Shortsword 65 1d6+1+db
Thieves’ Bludgeon 72% 1d8+db
Dagger 78% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Dodge 65%, Hide 81%, Jump 42%, Move
Quietly 70%, Track 65%
MEREGHN ASSASSIN
Working by day as a barmaid - as murder doesn’t always
pay the rent - this woman is a member of the Mereghn
and a trained killer. Any of the tavern’ customers who are
foolish enough to make an unwelcome advance, while
she is collecting their tankards or pouring them a beer,
invariably finds themselves clutching a broken wrist scant
moments later. In her professional life, this plump and
deadly woman favours slow acting poisons over direct
assaults, although she is not afraid to throw herself into
the fray when the need arises.
CHAOS 27, BALANCE 19, LAW 31
STR 13, CON 14, SIZ 13, INT 16, POW 14, DEX 18,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Leather And Rings
(No Helm) 1d6
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 120% 1d3+db
Dagger 110% 1d4+2+db
Desert Bow 100% 1d8+2+1/2db
SKILLS: Bargain 55%, Climb 103%, Conceal Object 76%,
Craft (Sleight Of Hand) 70%, Disguise 125%, Escape 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 92 -
Techniques30%, Fast Talk 66%, Hide 97%, Insight 85%,
Jump 78%, Listen 73%, Move Quietly 104%, Physick
44%, Potions 92%, Ride 80%, Search 79%, Throw 61%,
Track 55%, Trap 75%, Young Kingdoms 45%
PROSTITUTE
This prostitute is actually a slender young man of 21
summers, who masquerades as an attractive woman.
Thanks to padding, make-up, and his skilled dissembling,
many of his clients never know the difference, although
the especially attentive might notice his Adam’s apple or
strong hands. He works a series of taverns in the Foreign
Quarter, sometimes accompanying the men who buy his
favours to their lodgings, at other times leading them to
the nearest alley. Pillow talk ensures that he knows
several important secrets, and the adventurers may find
him a valuable source of information (although his
wisdom does not come cheap). He is currently
considering an offer at employment at Cleveland House,
a brothel in Rose Street, in the Merchant’s Quarter, which
subtly caters for guests seeking masculine
companionship.
CHAOS 17, BALANCE 12, LAW 19
STR 12, CON 12, SIZ 11, INT 13, POW 14, DEX 17,
APP 18
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 65% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Lovemaking) 85%, Disguise 90%, Insight
65%, Listen 81%
STREET GANG
These thugs might be affiliated with the Foreign Quarter
gang the Bravos, the Industrial Quarter’s Church Street
Boys, or a group of the Gamemaster’s own choosing.
Possibly they are motivated more by boredom than
criminal intent. They may be well-dressed young
noblemen looking for trouble, or perhaps they are a
drunken mob of sailors or stevedores itching for a fight.
They will invariably send their smallest and youngest
member to cause trouble and then come barrelling
around the corner, weapons drawn, once violence erupts.
The name of their gang, and the location of their
headquarters, should be determined by the Gamemaster.
STATISTICS #1 #2 #3 #4
STR 10 18 14 12
CON 12 14 9 11
SIZ 8 15 12 13
INT 13 7 10 10
POW 14 11 15 9
DEX 16 10 12 11
APP 12 9 15 10
HP 10 15 11 12
DB - 1D6 1D4 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 65% 1d3+db
Cudgel 45% 1d6+db
Dagger 55% 1d4+2+db
ARMOUR: Soft Leather (No Helm) 1d6-1
SPELLS: Gang Member #6 Knows Bonds Unbreakable
(3), Fury (1)
SKILLS: Climb 50%, Dodge 55%, Listen 60%, Move
Quietly 35%
NOTES: #1 is the smallest and youngest gang member;
#2 is his slow-witted protector; they both distrust #4, the
gang’s leader
SPY
In service to a foreign power, or perhaps serving another
duke who conspires against Duke Avan, this duplicitous
individual covertly seeks out residents with knowledge of
the city. The adventurers may overhear her planning
treason, or might steal her purse only to discover that it
holds documents pointing at an imminent invasion or
coupe d’etat. She is a sly, malicious and untrustworthy
figure who only leaves her bolthole in the Foreign
Quarter for sinister reasons.
CHAOS 29, BALANCE 13, LAW 25
STR 12, CON 13, SIZ 12, INT 17, POW 16, DEX 15,
APP 14
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: Half Plate (No Helm)
1d8
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Falchion 75% 1d6+2+db
Strangle Cord 61% Suffocation (as per
drowning)
Scimitar 71% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 80% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 65% 1d3+db
SPELLS: Breath of Life (1), Buzzard Eyes (1), Demon’s
Eye (1), Demon’s Ear (1), Heal (2), Midnight (1), Rat
Vision (10)
SKILLS: Bargain 65%, Disguise 52%, Dodge 60%, Insight
58%, Scribe 65%, Young Kingdoms 35%
CULTISTS
The worshippers of Chaos are as diverse as their
masters’ many aspects, as this collection of
cultists aptly demonstrates. Additional Chaos
cultists can be found in PLOTS AND POWERS.
MINOR CULTIST OF SLORTAR
Both an athlete and an aesthete, this vain young
nobleman was initiated into the cult a year ago by his
father’s mistress, who was also his lover. Having
successfully framed her for his father’s subsequent
murder, he has now inherited a small fortune, which he
spends on idle pleasures. He exercises every day, and
has a burning ambition for power and unrestrained
pleasure that may yet be his downfall. He delights in
befriending visitors to Old Hrolmar, who are easily taken
in by his lazy charm and decadent lifestyle, and
corrupting them in Slortar’s name. Adventurers are most
likely to encounter him in a fashionable tavern, a
gambling den, or at the theatre.
CHAOS 35, BALANCE 06, LAW 12 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 93 -
STR 14, CON 11, SIZ 13, INT 14, POW 17, DEX 13,
APP 15
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: Leather And Rings
(No Helm) 1d6
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 82% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
SPELLS: Chaos Warp (4), Curse of Chaos (4), Liken
Shape (4)
SKILLS: Climb 70%, Dodge 66%, Insight 45%, Jump
75%, Reckless Spending 90%, Scent/Taste 65%
GROTESQUE CULTIST OF SLORTAR
Obsessed with the oral and olfactory senses, this minor
cultist has converted himself into a living engine of
gluttony whose appetite for obscure and obscene
delicacies are never sated. The estranged son of a petty
Vilmirian noble, he is so morbidly obese that he is no
longer capable of movement. Drugged and docile slavephysicians
tend his naked bulk. A complex scaffold
constructed of rare timbers is built around and over his
bed, and supports a multitude of decanters, bubbling
alembics, and clay jars whose various contents are fed by
tubes into his mouth, nose and veins. Although
moribund, this gross cultist is a genius whose intellect is
at the cult’s permanent disposal. His problem-solving
skills are second to none: codes and cyphers that have
baffled the wisest minds in all Old Hrolmar, are little
more than simple quizzes to him. The adventurers might
encounter one of his drugged doctors out collecting
strange and suspicious ingredients, or be hired to gather
certain rare moulds from the Forest of Troos that the
cultist requires for a pungent new elixir.
CHAOS 42, BALANCE 3, LAW 10
STR 4, CON 18, SIZ 20, INT 19, POW 15, DEX 5,
APP 3
HIT POINTS: 19 ARMOUR: Blubber 1D3
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 55% 1d3+db
SKILLS: Art (Gourmet Cuisine) 80%, Bargain 75%, Belch
And Fester 101%, Evaluate 66%, Fast Talk 53%, Insight
86%, Own Language 85%, Other Language (Low
Melnibonéan) 75%, Potions 25%, Scent/Taste 275%,
Solve Enigma 101%, Young Kingdoms 30%
GREATER CULTIST OF SLORTAR
This apparently youthful Ilmioran nobleman arrived in Old
Hrolmar a year ago and quickly fell in with a clique of
young lords and ladies who chafed under the strictures
and traditions of the Church of Law. He is witty and
seductive, and has gained a reputation as a cultivated
dandy, an art collector of excellent taste, and a definitive
authority in all matters of fashion and lifestyle. He
discretely preaches the tenets of Slortar; a life dedicated
to sensuous pleasures and the liberating power of Chaos.
Unknown to all he possesses a dark secret. His enduring
youth and beauty are of supernatural origin, drained from
the bodies and souls of countless victims by a unique and
terrible demon (see below). This man is equally at home
at fashionable parties or seedy waterfront dives, and the
adventurers might encounter him in either such location.
He may seek to involve them as pawns in a grand and
dangerous intrigue, trick them into ruining the reputation
of a young lady or lordling, or attempt to seduce them in
order to prey upon their youth and beauty.
CHAOS 89, BALANCE 10, LAW 13
STR 14, CON 11, SIZ 12, INT 17, POW 21, DEX 13,
APP 21
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: Barbarian Leather
and Wood, Gorgeously
Lacquered, 1d8-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 78% 1d6+1+db
Dagger (Demon) 105% 1d4+2+db+1d10
SPELLS: Cloak Of Cran Liret (1-4), Chaos Warp (4),
Compulsion* (3), Summon Demon (1), Visage Of Arioch
(1-3), Wisdom Of Slortar (1-3)
INVOCATIONS: Slortar the Old
DEMONS: Gowerton, Greater Demon Painting; Xiharr,
Minor Demon Dagger
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 107%, Art (Poetry) 98%, Art
(Seduction) 119%, Bargain 64%, Dodge 86%, Craft
(Origami) 85%, Evaluate 91%, Fast Talk 78%, Insight 90%,
Listen 63%, Oratory 84%, Potions 65%, Scent/Taste 93%
*See the Gods of Chaos Monograph.
GOWERTON, GREATER DEMON PAINTING
(LIPPINCOTT BREED)
This powerful demon is bound in a heavy, iron-framed
canvas that originally depicted a life-sized oil painting of
its original binder. The current owner keeps the portrait
hidden behind a heavy velvet curtain. Any who gaze
upon it it see that it depicts a monstrous old man:
withered, wrinkled, with a loathsome visage and wearing
an expression of disgust and extreme ennui. A closer
inspection of the canvas may also allow observers to
notice the many faint, terrified faces of young men and
women that make up the seemingly abstract backdrop
before which the painted figure grimaces. If it is
somehow released from the painting Gowerton appears
as an inhuman, androgynous figure with lustrous silver
skin, indigo eyes, flames instead of hair, and a delicate,
fluting voice. Its beauty waxes and wanes in keeping
with the state of its fluctuating APP.
CON 10, SIZ 10, INT 19, POW 28,
APP 30 (CURRENTLY 4)
HIT POINTS: 17 MOVE: Nil
DAMAGE BONUS: N/A
ABILITIES: Demon Armour, 2d10 (The Canvas And Its
Heavy Iron Frame Are Supernaturally Resistant To
Damage - In Its Natural Form Gowerton’s Metallic Skin Is
Impervious To Most Weapons); Drain Appearance*
(Unique Ability); Bestow Youth** (Unique Ability)
*The Drain Appearance ability functions similarly to the
demonic ability Drain Soul, but directly attacks the
appearance of the target, draining 1D8 APP on a
successful POW:POW roll and transferring these points to
the demon. They must be standing within five feet of the
demon’ binding object in order to be vulnerable. Targets
reduced to zero APP become wretched, withered,
drooling things unrecognisable to even their closest
friends, and invariably go insane.
** Bestow Youth allows the demon to reduce a target’s
age by one year and increase his or her APP by 1D4, at a 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 94 -
cost of 10 MP and 10 points of its own APP. This
sorcerously bestowed youthfulness lasts for one month,
after which time the effects of age instantly return and
the artificial APP disappears unless the demon’s ability is
employed again; additionally the target’s original APP
score is reduced by 1D4 the instant the lost year returns.
In order for the demon to be able to employ this ability
the target must own an artistic representation of his or
herself, such as a painting or sculpture, to which the
cumulative effects of aging are transferred. If this artwork
is damaged or destroyed, the deferred years are instantly
returned to the target, often with fatal results.
NEED: To be cleaned with linseed oil once per month
XIHARR, LESSER DEMON DAGGER
(VALAXICUS BREED)
A slender, finely balanced dagger with a filigree blade
and a jewel-encrusted hilt.
POW 15, INT 8
ABILITIES: Demon Weapon, Adds 1d10 Damage; Sleep,
Causes The Target To Fall Into A Sorcerous Slumber For
20-Con Hours With A Successful Pow:Con Resistance
Roll.
NEED: To have lullabies sung to it weekly
CULTIST OF XIOMBARG
This Dharijorian witch is a voluntary exile from her
homeland, although she pretends to be from Jharkor (as
her warlike people are not much loved in Vilmir). Married
off as a girl to a cruel warlord, she took comfort in the
arms of a female lover, who was executed when their
affair was discovered. After her prayers for vengeance
were answered by Xiombarg of Chaos (who sent a swarm
of demon locusts to devour her husband) she found it
expedient to flee Dharijor. She dresses modestly in a
long gown of black velvet. Her black eyes glitter from
behind the veil that obscures her dark features, while her
hands are painted with intricate designs of henna. She
may fall in love with one of the adventurers, although if
scorned will become a deadly foe. Perhaps one of the
adventurers unwitting carries an artefact of special
significance to her cult that she seeks to recover.
CHAOS 50, BALANCE 14, LAW 18
STR 11, CON 12, SIZ 12, INT 16, POW 18, DEX 14,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Scimitar 75% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 81% 1d4+2+db
SPELLS: Hell’s Armour (1-4), Hell’s Sharp Flame (1-4),
Liken Shape (4), Muddle (1), Summon Demon 1), Witch
Sight (3)
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: Demon Earring (See
Below)
SKILLS: Art (Sensuous Dancing) 87%, Insight 75%, Ride
55%, Own Language 81%, Other Language (Mabden)
58%, Scribe 45%, Young Kingdoms 20%
BARLINGAR, LESSER DEMON (LYRILLIAN
BREED)
This diminutive demon is bound into one of a pair of
pearl earings, so that it can whisper important facts into
its mistresses’ ear.
INT 12, POW 16
ABILITIES: Hear, Listen to Distant Sounds; Knowledge,
Answer Reference Questions
NEED: To Be Polished With A Velvet Cloth Daily
DEMONS
Rogue demons are rare in Old Hrolmar, but not
unknown. Here are statistics for a handful of
lesser and greater demons, currently unbound,
which may roam the city should the
Gamemaster wish to include them in his or her
campaign.
NAPHOLIX
LESSER DEMON (BREED UNKNOWN)
This minor demon appears in the form of a swarm of
grotesque, blood-drinking locusts whose eyes glow with
a hellish light. It is usually summoned to guard a
particular location; no doubt this particular specimen was
released unbound as it is a relatively weak example of its
species.
STR 5, CON 24, SIZ 13, INT 13, POW 13, DEX 18,
AP N/A
HIT POINTS: 19 MOVE: 9
DAMAGE BONUS: None
ABILITIES: Exsanguinate, Drains 1d3 Hit Points/Round;
Locusts, Damage 1d8/Round In Tiny Bites
SKILLS: Speak Common 32%, Own Plane 15%, Listen
40%, Search 30%
NEED: Eat Insects, Especially Beetles, Daily
CATAPHAXOTL
 GREATER DEMON (GALJAMIRIK BREED)
This powerful demon resembles a giant black scorpion
with a bull-like head, from which curves two viciously
sharp horns. Cataphaxotl also has two massive claws and
a tail whose venomous stinger can lash out at a target up
to two yards away. Galjamirik demons are usually
summoned when a truly valuable horde must be
protected, but in Cataphaxotl’s cases, it killed its
summoner and escaped out into the world before it
could be bound. Spending most of its time burrowing
through the roots of the world, this demon may be
encountered underground, or when it suddenly tunnels
up to the surface in search of prey.
STR 26, CON 28, SIZ 28, INT 20, POW 24, DEX 15,
AP N/A
HIT POINTS: 28 MOVE: 8
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 95 -
DAMAGE BONUS: 2D6
ABILITIES: Gore 40%, 1d8+2+Db; Regenerate, Regains
One Hit Point Per Round; Soul Sight, Gauges Pow Of
Being In Its Sight With Pow 3 Or More; Dust, Obscures
Vision For Remainder Of Round; Carapace, Blocks
1d10+1d6 Damage; Acid Blood, Successful Hits To The
Demon Inflict 1d8 Damage To The Striking Weapon;
Attacker Is Splashed With Blood For 1d8 Damage With A
Failed Luck Roll; Clawx2, 60%, 1d8+Db (Second Claw
Attack Is Made In The Same Round At 5 Dex Rank Apart);
Stinger, 50%, Damage 1d8 Plus Pot 28 Venom
SKILLS: Speak Common 32%, Own Plane 15%, Search
30%, Listen 20%.
NEED: To eat 5 SIZ points of rock and earth daily
GREY DEFENDERS
The Grey Defenders, in their ubiquitous tabards,
nasal helms and chainmail surcoats, serve as Old
Hrolmar’s city watch, maintaining the peace and
upholding the Law throughout the city. A longstanding
and sometimes violent rivalry exists
between the Grey Defenders and the men of the
Vilmirian Legions. Additional statistics for the
Grey Defenders can be found in THE GAZETTEER.
COMMON SOLDIERS
The rank and file members of the Grey Defenders are
usually young men from poor families who have proved
their skill at arms as conscripts in the legions, and have
gone on to enlist as Defenders in return for food and
board. Some may be cowards, some aspire to bold
deeds, while others might just hope to serve their term
without losing an eye or a limb. Many view foreigners
with suspicion, although those who are born and bred in
Old Hrolmar will be more open minded about the
presents of outlanders than their compatriots from other
duchies.
STATISTICS #1 #2 #3 #4
STR 11 13 14 13
CON 14 13 15 12
SIZ 11 12 11 13
INT 10 11 09 12
POW 11 07 10 08
DEX 10 09 14 12
APP 17 12 10 11
HP 14 13 15 13
DB - 1D4 1D4 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 60% 1d6+1+db
Javelin 80% 1d6+1+1/2db
Brawl 55% 1d3+db
Kite Shield 60% 1d4+db+kb
ARMOUR: Leather & Rings (Helm On) 1d6+1
SKILLS: Climb 65%, Dodge 55%, Insight 50%, Search
65%, Track 50%
RECKLESS YOUTH
Having only been a Grey Defender for a matter of weeks,
and flushed with a newfound arrogance, this hotheaded
youth lacks diplomacy and experience. Consequently he
will be quick to arrest or strike anyone who angers him.
Should he survive a year without being de-listed or
killed, he may learn the wisdom his office demands.
CHAOS 04, BALANCE 01, LAW 10
STR 13, CON 12, SIZ 13, INT 9, POW 12, DEX 13,
APP 14
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 55% 1d6+1+db
Javelin 60% 1d6+1+1/2db
Brawl 50% 1d3+db
Kite Shield 55% 1d4+db+kb
SKILLS: Climb 55%, Dodge 52%, Insight 48%, Search
60%, Track 45%
HOARY VETERAN
This scarred and grizzled soldier has served as a Grey
Defender for many decades. He is close to retirement,
and avoids trouble where possible. When Fate or his
superiors demand action, he swears, sighs, and then
wields his weapons with lethal skill.
CHAOS 12, BALANCE 11, LAW 33
STR 15, CON 17, SIZ 13, INT 11, POW 13, DEX 14,
APP 8
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 85% 1d6+1+db
Javelin 80% 1d6+1+1/2db
Brawl 78% 1d3+db
Kite Shield 85% 1d4+db+kb
SKILLS: Bargain 45%, Climb 75%, Dodge 85%, Insight
75%, Search 85%, Track 70%, Young Kingdoms 35%
CHEERFUL SERGEANT
Although fond of a drink and not as supple as he was in
his youth, this doughty man is still strong of thew and
will. He enjoys joking with his men but never allows
them to grow overly familiar. He is hairy and solidly
built, and is as quick to laugh as he is to anger (although
being a good Vilmirian citizen he strives at all times to
keep his emotions in check so as to present a calm face
to the world).
CHAOS 15, BALANCE 10, LAW 25
STR 15, CON 13, SIZ 14, INT 13, POW 14, DEX 13,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 96 -
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 70% 1d6+1+db
Javelin 80% 1d6+1+1/2db
Brawl 70% 1d3+db
Kite Shield 75% 1d4+db+kb
SKILLS: Bargain 61%, Dodge 60%, Evaluate 40%, Insight
55%, Jump 40%, Listen 51%, Movie Quietly 44%, Young
Kingdoms 35%
MERCHANTS
Merchants are the lifeblood of any city. In Old
Hrolmar they have more freedom than anywhere
else in Vilmir. They are a self-important class,
and are always interested in increasing their
wealth. Below are five merchants for on-the-spot
action, including two visitors to dour Vilmir.
IMPOVERISHED TRADER
Fate has cursed this man. His partners have cheated him,
his ships have foundered, his caravans have been raided
and his touch seems to turn gold into lead. Nonetheless
he refuses to give up hope. Once fat and cheerful, his
thin frame now swims in oversized clothes that are
patched and worn, and he struggles to stay smiling. He
is increasing attracted to desperate strategies and
harebrained schemes to try and lift his fortunes. Being a
devout man, he will only employ adventurers or become
partners with those who will pray with him at the Temple
of Law before starting out on any joint venture.
CHAOS 23, BALANCE 15, LAW 29
STR 14, CON 12, SIZ 11, INT 13, POW 7, DEX 14,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 65% 1d6+1+db
SKILLS: Bargain 33%, Evaluate 31%, Insight 28%, Search
30%
SHIFTY MERCHANT
This merchant is always rubbing his hands and licking his
lips, and he struggles to maintain eye contact with
anyone he speaks to. Although he claims to be seeking
stouthearted swordsmen to guard his next caravan, this
devious trader plans to drug the guards and abscond
with the goods, before accusing his hapless employees of
the theft. Perhaps he will ask the adventurers to sign on
to help protect his next shipment?
CHAOS 36, BALANCE 06, LAW 18
STR 12, CON 13, SIZ 13, INT 17, POW 14, DEX 15,
APP 15
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Bargain 63%, Conceal Object 55%, Hide 62%,
Potions 61%
ILMIORAN MERCHANT
This plump, pleasant fellow has travelled overland to Old
Hrolmar with a cargo of leather, hides and glassware. He
has tanned skin, blonde hair, and a carefully waxed and
styled moustache. He wears red hose; stout, scuffed
leather shoes; a white linen shirt under a slashed doublet
of rich blue velvet; and a short, collarless cloak of richly
embroidered wool. His red velvet hat is decorated with a
single white feather. Having sold his goods for a tidy
profit he is now drinking and gambling with a passion, all
the while complaining about what cold fish these
Vilmirians are. He will be grateful for company, and will
happily advise adventurers who are looking for
employment about any caravans that are about to depart
and similar opportunities. If footpads attack him, his
honour demands that any who assist in saving him must
be generously rewarded.
CHAOS 17, BALANCE 19, LAW 36
STR 13, CON 12, SIZ 14, INT 15, POW 12, DEX 10,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: Soft Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Battle Axe 65% 1d8+2+db
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: A single fire
elemental bound into a flint, which is invaluable
when lighting fires on wet nights
SKILLS: Bargain 46%, Evaluate 65%, Navigate 45%,
Repair/Devise 41%
PURPLE TOWNSMAN
This portly man embodies the best traits of a Purple
Towns’ merchant. He is broad shouldered, barrel
chested, and with a slowly spreading waistline thanks to
his successful lifestyle. He wears clothes of silk, linen and
fine cotton in shades of purple and black, embellished
with pearls and embroidered with gold thread. His
auburn hair is worn long and loose, and he sports a
neatly trimmed beard. This merchant is levelheaded,
superstitious, and prone to bragging about his nation’s
success. He is also fiercely competitive, and will not back
down from a challenge or a wager no matter how high
the stakes.
CHAOS 21, BALANCE 27, LAW 39
STR 16, CON 17, SIZ 15, INT 12, POW 11, DEX 15,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: Sea Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Sea Axe 65% 2d6+2+db
Broadsword 55% 1d8+1+db
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: None, nor will he look
favourably upon those who binds elementals of air or
water into their service
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 97 -
SKILLS: Bargain 34%, Navigate 66%, Search 60%,
Sailing 72%, Swim 54%, Young Kingdoms 35%
UNSCRUPULOUS MERCHANT
This Vilmirian merchant has accrued significant wealth
but at great personal cost. He has cheated his own
brother, and been disowned by his father. In the pursuit
of personal wealth he has lied, stolen and even killed. He
is sleek and proud, and wears only imported clothing
from Filkhar and Ilmiora. When his thin lips smile, his
grey eyes never do. His heart mightbelong to Goldar, but
Chaos owns his soul.
CHAOS 42, BALANCE 13, LAW 33
STR 11, CON 10, SIZ 14, INT 14, POW 15, DEX 11,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: Soft Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 55% 1d8+1+db
SKILLS: Bargain 74%, Evaluate 91%, Fast Talk 65%,
Insight 65%, Own Language (Common) 70%, Young
Kingdoms 35%
NOBLES
The Vilmirian nobility are Old Hrolmar’s social
elite. Unlike the lower classes, nobles have
permission to bear arms within the city walls.
They are also the only people allowed to ride
horses; commoners must walk, or ride donkeys.
Some of Old Hrolmar’s nobles are inbred, their
blood weakened by constant intermarriage
between a handful of families; others are robust,
and look to a future less constrained by the
Church of Law.
BORED NOBLEWOMAN
This plain young woman has been schooled in all that is
proper for a Vilmirian lady, and chafes at the constraints
of her daily life. Rather than practise her embroidery
while waiting demurely for her father to find her a
husband, she prefers to read all she can about the world
outside Vilmir, paying no heed to her mother’s claims
that reading will furrow her brow and give her wrinkles.
Although accompanied by a nurse or a chaperone
whenever she leaves the house, she will be quick to take
advantage of any chance for interaction with an
apparently well-travelled stranger.
CHAOS 06, BALANCE 13, LAW 18
STR 8, CON 11, SIZ 10, INT 16, POW 15, DEX 13,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 11 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Hatpin 75% 1d3+db
Scratch 55% 1d2+db
SKILLS: Art (Courtly Manners) Ask Pointed Questions
70%, Blush Demurely 65%, Dance 70%, Insight 50%, Ride
Sidesaddle 43%, Scribe 30%, Unlady-Like Behaviour 45%,
Young Kingdoms 18%
CONSERVATIVE NOBLE
This man is a perfect Vilmirian gentleman, and has such
control of his emotions that even when outraged by the
foreign devils that crowd Old Hrolmar’s streets, his
demeanour is impassive and seemingly calm. He dresses
in traditional garb, and is never seen in public without his
hat and gloves.
CHAOS 11, BALANCE 14, LAW 36
STR 12, CON 13, SIZ 11, INT 14, POW 14, DEX 10,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 12 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings (No
Helm) 1d6
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
BroadSword 75% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 55% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Courtly Manners) 80%, Insight 42%,
Oratory 53%, Scribe 30%, Ride 57%
DISENCHANTED NOBLE
This muscular gentleman is about 40 years old, and
sports not only a badly set broken nose, but also several
impressive scars. He is grey-haired and his posture is
stiff. He is grimly idealistic. Formerly a captain in the
Vilmirian legion, with a posting in the Vilmirian
Protectorates, he resigned his commission two years ago
after discovering that several of his lieutenants were
responsible for a series of abuses of the local peasantry.
They presumed that their rank and privilege would grant
them immunity from prosecution, but to their shock the
captain ordered their arrest. In the face of overwhelming
evidence the young men were convicted, and sentenced
to death. The resulting scandal (one of the lieutenants
was the nephew of Duke Ongar of Dolgar) tarred the
captain’s military reputation and social standing, and
shattered his belief in Vilmir’s right to rule the
protectorates. Today he ekes out a frugal living in Old
Hrolmar as an occasional consultant upon matters of
security, and shuns the city’s nobility, (although he is
known to and has the grudging respect of the Grey
Defenders). He shares a small lodging in New Hrolmar
with a young commoner whom he rescued from the
Mariol massacre, and who is now his constant
companion.
CHAOS 24, BALANCE 51, LAW 47
STR 15, CON 16, SIZ 14, INT 13, POW 13, DEX 15,
APP 15
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: Half Plate (Helm On)
1d8+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Short Sword 95% 1d6+1+db
Broadsword 95% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 55% 1d4+2+db 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 98 -
Hunting Bow 75% 1d6+1+1/2db
Javelin 65% 1d6+1/2db
Hoplite Shield 96% db+kb
SKILLS: Bargain 63%, Brood Upon Injustice 83%, Dodge
70%, Insight 86%, Lead Troops 62%, Oratory 79%, Ride
75%, Search 80%, Track 47%, Young Kingdoms 30%
FOP
As if hoping his flamboyant fashion-sense will make up
for his weak chin and crossed eyes, this inbred young
nobleman adorns himself in rich silks, velvets and furs.
He shows little interest in any subject other than himself,
and is rarely seen without a wineglass or a snuffbox in
hand. At the Gamemaster’s discretion his flamboyant
exterior may hide a keen mind; alternatively he may be
even shallower than he seems. He and his cronies might
be met in any tavern in the city; slumming it among the
unwashed masses, or in one of the city’s classier
establishments, loudly discussing the boorish behaviour
of foreigners.
CHAOS 10, BALANCE 06, LAW 28
STR 13, CON 10, SIZ 11, INT 9, POW 13, DEX 14,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 11 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 83% 1d6+1+db
Dagger 66% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Courtly Manners) 80%, Berate Servants
74%, Dance 60%, Gossip 85%, Ride 75%
PRIESTS
The feudal nature of Vilmirian society owes
much to the strictures of the Church of Law,
which teaches that every citizen has an allotted
place within the cosmic order, and that only
heretics would try to change the status quo.
Peasants were born to serve the nobility, and the
nobility serve the Church, and so it has always
been. Representatives of the dominant sects of
Law are arrayed below.
ABSENT-MINDED PRIEST OF ARKYN
This skinny, unkempt fellow wears a stained blue robe,
rarely finds time to shave, and is invariably focussed
upon an abstract concept or a potential invention rather
than the world around him. Consequently he can seem
foolish and forgetful despite his prodigious intellect. He
might come to a sudden stop in a crowded street in
order to scribble a complex mathematical formula in
chalk on the nearest wall, or try to enlist volunteers to
help him test a new flying machine. Perhaps he has lost
an important blueprint and implores the adventurers to
help him recover it.
CHAOS 03, BALANCE 11, LAW 41
STR 10, CON 13, SIZ 12, INT 19, POW 15, DEX 13,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 30% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Craft (Metalworking) 68%, Natural World 55%,
Potions 40%, Repair/Devise 99%, Scribe 75%, Young
Kingdoms 40%
KINDLY PRIEST OF MIRATH
This slender, softly spoken priest has bright blue eyes
and mouse-brown hair. He wears sandals and a white
robe, and administers succour to the sick and dying, as
well as officiating at baptisms and funerals. He serves
Lady Mirath of the White Hands, who governs time and
ends each life at its allotted hour, and whose high priest
in Vilmir is Chancellor Marinus of Belgair.
CHAOS 05, BALANCE 19, LAW 33
STR 12, CON 15, SIZ 13, INT 12, POW 15, DEX 13,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Light Mace 55% 1d6+2+db
Cleaver 95% 1d8+db
SKILLS: Doctrine of Law 46%, Insight 50%, Listen 61%,
Natural World 48%, Physick 85%, Potions 90%,
Scent/Taste 53%, Scribe 40%
MARTIAL PRIESTS OF TOVIK
Wearing red robes over their armour, these warriorpriests
of Tovik the Relentless are the shock troops of the
Church Militant. Chancellor Dassom of Uhaio is the head
of their order.
STATISTICS #1 #2 #3 #4
STR 15 13 18 14
CON 14 12 15 14
SIZ 18 12 16 13
INT 10 17 09 12
POW 10 13 12 09
DEX 15 11 13 13
APP 12 10 11 07
HP 17 12 15 14
DB 1D6 1D4 1D6 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 75% 1d8+1+db
Heavy Mace 66% 1d8+2+db
ARMOUR: Young Kingdoms Plate (Helm On) 1d10+2
SKILLS: Doctrine of Law 40%, Dodge 60%, Insight 45%,
Jump 50%, Listen 50%
STERN PRIESTS OF DONBLAS
The members of this order pass judgment upon Old
Hrolmar’s wrongdoers. Secular crimes are punished with
a spell in the docks or imprisonment in the city gaol;
traitors are invariably dispatched to toil in Dolgar’s salt 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 99 -
mines; heretics are always executed. The priests of
Donblas are even-tempered, wise and dispassionate.
Cardinal Garrick, the true ruler of Vilmir, is the head of
their order.
STATISTICS #1 #2 #3 #4
STR 13 16 12 14
CON 14 13 13 13
SIZ 10 14 16 12
INT 15 17 12 14
POW 14 10 12 09
DEX 12 10 12 11
APP 09 12 11 10
HP 12 14 15 13
DB - 1D4 1D4 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Broadsword 65% 1d8+1+db
Light Mace 55% 1d6+2+db
ARMOUR: Half Plate (No Helm) 1d8
SKILLS: Administer Justice 90%, Doctrine of Law 80%,
Insight 75%, Legal Precedents 81%, Listen 65%, Oratory
83%, Proscribe Punishment 80%, Scribe 76%
TROUBLED PRIEST
This devotee of Vallyn the Wise walks the streets deep in
thought, his eyes downcast and his expression
melancholy. After witnessing many injustices perpetrated
in Law’s name, he has begun to question his faith and his
allegiance to the Church. The adventurers might witness
him intervening in the arrest of a starving child accused
of stealing a loaf of bread; or see him weeping as he
watches an execution in the town square. Perhaps they
can turn him towards contemplation of the Cosmic
Balance, or inspire him to advocate for change within the
Church of Law (although if he speaks publicly about his
heretical notions he will not be long for this world).
CHAOS 10, BALANCE 29, LAW 32
STR 12, CON 14, SIZ 11, INT 17, POW 15, DEX 10,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Wrestle 79% special
Wooden Staff 76% 1d6+1+db
SKILLS: Contemplate Injustice 79%, Doctrine of Law
55%, Insight 60%, Listen 53%, Oratory 61%, Scribe 35%
SAILORS
Visitors to Old Hrolmar from foreign lands,
press-ganged members of the Vilmirian navy,
and swaggering Vilmirian privateers all make use
of Old Hrolmar’s harbour. Additional statistics
for seafarers and their ships can be found in the
Chaosium supplement Sailing On The Seas Of
Fate.
ARROGANT NAVAL CAPTAIN
This haughty Vilmirian lord is the scion of one of Uhaio’s
noble houses, and is accustomed to his every command
being instantly obeyed. He commands the quinquereme
Arkyn’s Arrow, a 190-foot, single-masted warship
powered by two decks of oars. As well as his five
officers, another 45 sailors, 120 rowers and 22 marines
serve under him. The adventurers are most likely to
encounter him during one of his rare, extended trips
ashore at the Quayside inn The Duke’s Head or at Duke
Avan’s court. The captain might be recruiting warriors
familiar with the evils of Pan Tang for a special and
secretive mission in the king’s name, or perhaps he is
reluctantly seeking advice from one of Old Hrolmar’s
resident sages about a strange discovery his crew
recently made at sea.
CHAOS 11, BALANCE 17, LAW 45
STR 16, CON 14, SIZ 13, INT 16, POW 15, DEX 11,
APP 15
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Sea Leather (Helm
On) 1d6
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Cutlass 126% 1d6+2+db
Dagger 113% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Art (Courtly Manners) 58%, Dodge 88%,
Navigate 65%, Oratory 82%, Sailing 118%, Scribe 45%,
Ride 65%, Swim 74%, Young Kingdoms 50%
BOASTFUL JHARKORIAN SAILOR
This short, pot-bellied sailor is a powerful wrestler. He
earns a tidy sum whenever his ship pulls into port by
competing in unofficial competitions and challenging
local toughs to wrestle with him, while his shipmates
place bets on his and their behalf. One popular racket
they run involves the Jharkorian spilling a drink on a
target and goading them into challenging him to a fight.
He is uncouth and ugly, with a broken nose, cauliflower
ears, and thick sideburns.
CHAOS 08, BALANCE 02, LAW 04
STR 15, CON 15, SIZ 14, INT 13, POW 13, DEX 16,
APP 8
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Wrestle 75% special
Sea Axe 55% 2d6+1+db
SKILLS: Climb 80%, Craft (Carpentry) 65%, Dodge 52%,
Jump 55%, Listen 45%, Natural World 55%, Navigate
70%, Own Language (Common) 65%, Repair/Devise 72
%, Sailing 95%, Swim 35%, Young Kingdoms 65%
BRUTAL PRESS-GANG LEADER
This swaggering, barrel-chested Vilmirian is always on
the lookout for fresh ‘recruits’ for His Majesty’s navy. He
is coarse, confident, and adept at presenting a friendly
guise to those individuals he encounters in Old Hrolmar’s
rougher inns and taverns. After plying his victims with
drink, he leads them into the arms of his gang, or if he is
confident that they present him no threat, clubs them
into unconsciousness himself. 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 100 -
CHAOS 28, BALANCE 07, LAW 32
STR 15, CON 13, SIZ 15, INT 12, POW 11, DEX 10,
APP 9
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Sea Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Cutlass 60% 1d6+2+db
Dagger 78% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 81% 1d3+db
Thieves’ Bludgeon 112% 1d8+db
SKILLS: Evaluate 45%, Dodge 60%, Fast Talk 80%,
Insight 75%, Move Quietly 77%
ERRATIC ILMIORAN SAILOR
This young man is renowned in the taverns of Quayside
as a fine sailor, but not one you would want on your
ship. He has sailed every sea in the Young Kingdoms and
wants nothing more than to return to the Bakshaan of his
youth: which he remembers as a bustling seaport rather
than a rich, landlocked city at the junction of the Barlimm
and Vador rivers. In a recent visit to Bakshaan he was
tormented by other inconsistencies between the city he
remembers and the actual city, including streets that
were not quite as he remembered them and a family who
claimed not to know him at all. He fled to Vilmir, and has
since drifted towards Old Hrolmar, where he finds short
stints of work in the harbour.
With his lightly tanned skin and blonde hair, he is
typically Ilmioran in appearance save for the haunted
look in his grey-green eyes. He is increasingly convinced
that some deranged Chaos godling is sporting with him;
consequently his behaviour is increasingly unstable,
although he has learned to keep his beliefs to himself. He
obsessively double and triple checks everything;
interrogates his companions about their personal
histories again and again in case their own stories begin
to change; compulsively re-opens doors after closing
them in order to be sure that nothing has changed in the
room he just left; and is maudlin when drunk.
CHAOS 37, BALANCE 31, LAW 27
STR 13, CON 13, SIZ 12, INT 11, POW 8, DEX 13,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Cutlass 60% 1d6+2+db
Dagger 40% 1d4+2+db
Pike 55% 1d10+2+db*
Shortsword 60% 1d6+1+db*
Full Shield 50% 1d4+db+kb*
* Skills marked with an asterisk are ones that the sailor
does not remember he possesses, and that hint at his
real origins; they may return to him under the right
circumstances.
SKILLS: Bargain 40%, Climb 75%, Dodge 60%, Forced
March 55%*, Jump 50%, Insight 55%, Million Spheres
25%*, Mutter Under Breath 60%, Natural World 35%,
Plane Shift 15%*, Sailing 110%, Swim 60%, Wire-Walk
35%, Young Kingdoms 35%
GLOOMY TARKESHITE SAILOR
This short, dark-faced, Tarkeshite sports a huge black
beard shiny with oil, and dresses in simple leathers and
furs in accordance with the barbaric fashions of his land.
Having only recently berthed in Old Hrolmar, he seeks to
sell the few valuable goods he owns (intricately carved
whales’ teeth, and combs fashioned from whalebone) in
the Merchants’ Quarter or New Hrolmar’s marketplace,
or even to a passing stranger. Nightfall invariably finds
him in a Quayside tavern, softly singing strange northern
songs to himself in a low resounding voice, as he
methodically drinks through the proceeds of his sales.
Should the adventurers engage him in conversation they
may learn his sad tale: his entire family were slain by a
monstrous beast, part shark and part seal, that haunts the
chill waters off the northern Tarkesh coast (see the
Chaosium publication Perils of the Young Kingdoms for
further details). He is searching the ports of the world in
the hope of discovering some spell or enchantment with
which he can slay the beast, Straasha willing.
CHAOS 10, BALANCE 12, LAW 13
STR 18, CON 18, SIZ 12, INT 11, POW 16, DEX 11,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: Sea Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Sea Axe 50% 2d6+1+db
SKILLS: Art (Sing Depressing Tarkeshite Songs) 98%,
Bargain 64%, Evaluate 50%, Insight 48%, Navigate 51%,
Sailing 75%, Swim 30%, Climb 69%, Jump 74%, Natural
World 54%
SECRETIVE CABIN BOY
None know that this beardless boy is an adventurous girl
who ran away to sea at the age of 14. In the intervening
years she has sailed the five seas, and witnessed both
wonders and horrors unimaginable to landlubbers.
Although she will never grow tired to the sea, she knows
that her fellow crewmembers begin to question why she
is still slim and slender and shows no signs of becoming
a man. She has regretfully decided that the time has
come to abandon her crewmates here in Old Hrolmar.
CHAOS 21, BALANCE 18, LAW 12
STR 12, CON 11, SIZ 9, INT 13, POW 15, DEX 12,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 10 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 65% 1d3+db
Boathook 40% 1d8+db
Belaying Pin 35% 1d6+db
SKILLS: Art (Scrimshaw) 40%, Climb 50%, Disguise 65%,
Dodge 50%, Fast Talk 43%, Sailing 45%, Swim 54%,
Young Kingdoms 25%
SWAGGERING PRIVATEER
In the eyes of other nations this man, and the crew of
which he is part, are nothing more than pirates. To
Vimirians he is a hero. He roams the Five Oceans
attacking the minions of Chaos wherever they are found, 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 101 -
and returning with booty to enrich Vilmir’s economy. The
deeds of such men are part of contemporary folklore in
the drab duchies.
CHAOS 27, BALANCE 11, LAW 45
STR 17, CON 16, SIZ 14, INT 12, POW 16, DEX 14,
APP 18
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: Sea Leather (Helm
On) 1d6
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 106% 1d3+db
Scimitar 140% 1d8+1+db
Dagger 101% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Climb 67%, Dodge 80%, Jump 78%, Move
Quietly 75%, Navigate 90%, Physick 61%, Sailing 110%,
Swim 67%, Young Kingdoms 65%
VILMIRIAN SAILORS
This bluff and hearty crew have long since had insolence
and disobedience beaten out of them.
STATISTICS #1 #2 #3 #4
STR 14 15 10 12
CON 15 12 16 11
SIZ 14 18 13 15
INT 11 06 10 10
POW 12 10 14 11
DEX 12 14 17 12
APP 12 13 10 9
HP 15 15 15 13
DB: 1D4 1D6 - 1D4
STATISTICS #5 #6 #7 #8
STR 14 11 16 12
CON 13 14 10 13
SIZ 9 12 11 13
INT 9 12 11 8
POW 8 12 10 11
DEX 12 14 11 15
APP 8 11 10 7
HP 11 13 11 13
DB: - - 1D4 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Cutlass 55% 1d6+2+db
Dagger 65% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 78% 1d3+db
ARMOUR: Sea Leather (No Helm) 1d6-1
SKILLS: Climb 65%, Listen 50%, Row 85%, Sailing 75%
SMUGGLERS
A secret network of black marketeers controls
the importation of illegal substances into the
city, and is in turn controlled by the forces of
Chaos. Not all of them are evil, but some have
the blackest of hearts.
AVERAGE SMUGGLERS
These dissolute ruffians are deeply entrenched within Old
Hrolmar’s criminal subculture. They know numerous
routes through the sewers beneath the city, and are
actively involved in the illegal importation of an array of
contraband: including bound demons. Although not all of
them are active worshippers of Slortar, most know of the
cult’s existence and their gang’s allegiance to it.
STATISTICS #1 #2 #3 #4
STR 13 17 9 11
CON 12 11 15 10
SIZ 14 18 13 15
INT 18 6 13 10
POW 10 11 13 15
DEX 13 16 7 13
APP 10 11 13 9
HP 13 15 14 13
DB: 1D4 1D6 - 1D4
STATISTICS #5 #6 #7 #8
STR 13 12 15 14
CON 12 16 9 13
SIZ 9 12 11 13
INT 9 11 13 12
POW 8 12 10 11
DEX 11 16 9 17
APP 8 13 14 12
HP 11 14 10 13
DB: - - 1D4 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Cutlass 65% 1d6+2+db
Dagger 75% 1d4+2+db
Brawl 70 1d3+db
ARMOUR: Sea Leather (No Helm) 1d6-1
SKILLS: Climb 54%, Conceal Object 61%, Evaluate 55%,
Hide 60%, Listen 55%, Move Quietly 63%, Sailing 75%
IMPORTANT SMUGGLER
Every cell of smugglers is led by a lieutenant, a lowranking
acolyte of Slortar whose interests lie more in
personal gain than advancing the cause of Chaos. Most
such men are Vilmirian by birth. This particular individual
takes a foppish pride in his appearance, although his
effeminate demeanour masks a lusty appetite for wanton
women. Publicly he adopts the dour disposition of his
countrymen, bemoaning his allegiance to fashion as an
arduous burden, but in private he revels in merriment,
gluttony, decadence and fornication. He carries an
intricate silver snuffbox in the sleeve of his jacket, which
he is forever losing, while a Venodrax demon is bound
into his rapier.
CHAOS 39, BALANCE 11, LAW 17
STR 14, CON 13, SIZ 16, INT 12, POW 17, DEX 15,
APP 14
HIT POINTS: 15 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings (No
Helm) 1d6
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Rapier 86% 1d6+1+db+2d10 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 102 -
SPELLS: Bonds Unbreakable (3), Gift Of Grome (4),
Hell’s Armour (1-4), Muddle (1), Visage Of Arioch (1-4),
Witch Sight (3).
DEMONS AND ELEMENTALS: One Demon bound into
his rapier (see below)
SKILLS: Art (Conversation) 75%, Climb 60%, Conceal
Object 70%, Evaluate 65%, Hide 70%, Listen 65%, Move
Quietly 72%, Sailing 65%, Scribe 45%, Young Kingdoms
45%
QELIXIQOR, LESSER DEMON RAPIER
(VENODRAX BREED)
When drawn, the blade hisses and steams, and drips a
venomous greenish ichor. Qelixiqor’s need is to be
immersed in crushed ice for an hour per week.
CON 12, INT 7, POW 6
ABILITY: Demon Weapon, Adds 2d10 Damage, Stinger,
Inflicts Poison Damage Equal To The Demon’s Con With A
Successful Con:Con Resistance Roll; Failure Inflicts Half
Con Damage But Thereafter The Target Is Immune To The
Poison.
VISITORS
Since Duke Avan came to the throne, foreigners
have flocked to Old Hrolmar from the Four
Corners of the Young Kingdoms in search of
adventure, experience, wealth and opportunity.
Here are a handful of colourful and curious
visitors whom the adventurers might meet upon
the streets; other visitors to the city are detailed
in THE GAZETTEER.
BEWILDERING PHILOSOPHER
With his long white beard and ink-stained fingers, this
elderly Filkharian gentleman is clearly a successful
scholar. He has only recently arrived in Old Hrolmar,
having hastily resigned from his post at the University of
Cadsandria due to an, as yet, unknown scandal. Perhaps
he hopes to gain a teaching position in some noble
house, or seeks a patron to support him while he finishes
a deposition regarding the nature of the universe. He
might be seeking rare texts regarding the doom of the
world or those that will confirm his belief in the existence
of other worlds. His language is complex, his theories
even more so, while his dissertations and conversations
are convoluted, dry, and meandering.
CHAOS 33, BALANCE 33, LAW 33
STR 9, CON 10, SIZ 11, INT 19, POW 15, DEX 12,
APP 14
HIT POINTS: 10 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 55% 1d3+db
Dagger 50% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Confounding Discourse 55%, Insight 52%,
Million Spheres 14%, Mumble 101%, Obscure Philosophy
107%, Other Language (Mabden) 17%, Other Language
(Low Melnibonéan) 55%, Scribe 92%, Unknown
Kingdoms 15%, Young Kingdoms 80%
CURSED SCHOLAR
This gaunt Vilmirian might be encountered foraging for
food among the refuse at New Hrolmar’s outdoor market,
or roaming the city’s streets late at night. He dresses
head-to-toe in rags, although he is no beggar and he
does not plead for alms; indeed he never speaks at all. A
large black brute of a dog trots behind him wherever he
goes. His bare room in the Foreign Quarter, to which he
can be easily followed, contains only a thin mattress and
a large chest overflowing with tattered scraps of
parchment.
This man was once an educated worshipper of Vallyn of
Law, but his hubris and his hunger for knowledge proved
his downfall. He sought out the Cult of the Silent
Watcher, devotees of the Chaos Lord Maluk, whose
cowled priests offered him the forbidden wisdom he
sought. Without considering the price he would have to
pay he agreed to their bargain, and so was damned.
Now, while he knows all manner of arcane secrets, he
cannot speak of them. Should he ever attempt to talk, or
to communicate anything he knows to another soul, the
demonic hound, which follows him (and which whispers
terrible secrets to him every night as he sleeps), will kill
him and send his soul to hell. Every day he writes down
the visions Maluk shows to him in dreams, and every day
he tears up the notes, weeping all the while.
If the hellhound can be slain the cursed scholar will be
eternally in the adventurers’ debt, and could, no doubt,
provide them with all manner of useful information. Of
course, Maluk would seek vengeance for the death of his
pet, with adventurers who aid the scholar becoming the
unwitting targets of the Chaos Lord’s wrath.
CHAOS 17, BALANCE 31, LAW 37
STR 11, CON 12, SIZ 14, INT 13, POW 11, DEX 12,
APP 11
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Dagger 40% 1d4+2+db
SKILLS: Dodge 30%, Forage 44%, Insight 65%, Million
Spheres 78%, Scribe 63%
THE SCHOLARS DEMON DOG
(BREED UNKNOWN)
Appears as a hulking, shaggy hound, part mastiff, part
wolfhound, and part mystery. It has only one eye (a clue
to its supernatural origins and its true master’s identity)
and its bite is definitely worse than its bark.
STR 26, CON 20, SIZ 12, INT 19, POW 33, DEX 20
HIT POINTS: 31 MOVE: Run 10
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D8
ABILITIES: Armoured Hide And Hair 1d4; Claws 70%,
Damage 1d8+2+1d8; Tongue* 75%, Damage Special;
Bite 85%, Damage 1d8+1d8; cat Stalk**, Demon Closes
On Targets Without Crossing Intermediate Spaces;
Empathy**, Can Sense A Target’s Strongest Emotion And
Immediate Intention; Hear, Can Listen To Distant Sounds; 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 103 -
Leap, Jump 3 Yard High Or 5 Yard Long Per Mp;
Regenerate, Regains 1 Hit Point Per Round; See, Sees
Distant Objects More Closely; Seer, Views Past, 1 Year
Per Mp, 165% Accuracy
*Tongue, grabs target and draws it within biting range;
one STR:STR chance to get free; if smaller than SIZ 12
target can be swallowed whole and thereafter takes 1D8
damage each round
** See The Bronze Grimoire
SKILLS: Dodge 80%, Own Plane 80%, Young Kingdoms
35%, Common Tongue 95%, Impersonate Mongrel 75%,
Whisper Secrets Of Maluk 101%.
NEED: To have its head scratched daily
DESERT WARRIOR
This prince of the desert has fallen on hard times. His
entire family was slain by unknown enemies while he was
away hunting a lion as part of his initiation into
manhood. Riding hard on their murderers’ trail, he came
at last to Old Hrolmar, where his unfamiliarity with the
city quickly cost him his horse and the better part of his
wealth. Now he seeks revenge, both upon the scoundrels
who stole from him, as well as his family’s killers - if he
ever locates them.
He has ebony skin, long slender fingers, and, in the
manner of his people, wears kohl around his eyes. He
may encounter the adventurers while seeking
employment with men and women of honour, or perhaps
as the result of one of them unwittingly purchasing his
stolen horse. If he suspects them of complicity in the
theft his vengeance will be swift, but once convinced of
their innocence he proves himself to be a brave and true
companion.
CHAOS 13, BALANCE 16, LAW 11
STR 13, CON 16, SIZ 12, INT 12, POW 10, DEX 15,
APP 13
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Barbarian Leather &
Wood (No Helm) 1d8
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Scimitar 75% 1d8+1+db
Desert Bow 70% 1d8+2+1/2db
SKILLS: Climb 60%, Craft (Skinning & Tanning) 45%,
Dodge 50%, Hide 40%, Listen 65%, Move Quietly 50%,
Natural World 55%, Other Language (Common) 30%,
Own Language (Lesh) 60%, Ride Camel 90%, Search
40%, Throw 45%, Track 85%
PILGRIM OF GROME
The tribal tattoos that swirl across this woman’s
voluptuous yet muscular body and broad face plainly
display her Pikaraydian origins. Her glossy black hair is
tied back in a thick plait, and she wears a striking
necklace of carven jade at the base of her throat. A
wolfskin cloak is draped over her shoulders, beneath
which she wears a tartan dress belted at the waist. She is
a devout worshipper of the Elemental Rulers, and pays
special devotion to Grome the Earth King, in whose
name she has embarked on a pilgrimage. Although she
travels alone, leaving her strife-torn nation in search of
an idol stolen from a Pikaraydian temple 200 years ago,
thanks to her skills with sword and bow she has little to
fear except the supernatural. While mistrustful of
strangers, she might forge a temporary alliance with any
adventurer who could aid her quest, although she
despises Chaos worshippers and has little time for
followers of Straasha - who in her eyes are as unreliable
as the ever-shifting sea.
CHAOS 19, BALANCE 36, LAW 18
STR 15, CON 14, SIZ 13, INT 12, POW 17, DEX 16,
APP 10
HIT POINTS: 14 ARMOUR: Sea Leather (No
Helm) 1d6-1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Brawl 70% 1d3+db
Great Sword 101% 2d8+db
Dirk 85% 1d4+2+db
Hunting Bow 91% 1d6+1+1/2db
SPELLS: Gift Of Grome (4), Summon Elemental (1).
SKILLS: Climb 78%, Dodge 56%, Hide 81%, Insight 60%,
Jump 45%, Listen 70%, Move Quietly 76%, Natural World
60%, Navigate 35%, Ride 44%, Search 64%, Track 52%,
Trap 65%.
QUIXOTIC KNIGHT
This gaunt old man, with his untamed eyebrows, bristling
moustache, and battered armour, is a minor Lormyrian
noble. He is a devout but apocalyptic follower of Law,
and believes that the world is at risk of soon being
engulfed by Chaos. He despises injustice, especially if the
misdeed is perpetrated in Law’s name. He is also short
sighted, increasingly senile, and outspoken. He
sometimes mistakes objects for people, and more than
once has been seen lecturing a hitching post on the
perils of Chaos, much to his loyal servant’s chagrin.
He came to Vilmir on a pilgrimage, hoping that the
White Lords would reveal to him how he might help save
the Young Kingdoms from vile Entropy. Instead of
discovering illumination he has been shocked by the
harsh nature of Vilmirian society.
The quixotic knight might be encountered preaching in
the Town Square under the watchful eyes of surly priests
of Donblas, and may soon need defending from them.
Perhaps he mistakes the adventurers for someone who
can introduce him to Duke Avan, whom he hopes to
persuade to mount an expedition to Castle Kaneloon in
search of the cure of the world’s pain.
CHAOS 3, BALANCE 17, LAW 47
STR 8, CON 7, SIZ 8, INT 13, POW 10, DEX 9,
 APP 8
HIT POINTS: 8 ARMOUR: Half-Plate & Mail
(Helm On) 1d8+2
DAMAGE BONUS: -1D4
Weapon Skill Damage
Great Sword 21% 2d8+db
Cavalry Lance 25% 1d8+1+db (+horse
db when charging)
Small Shield 18% 1d3+db+kb
*His extremely low weapons skills are due to his lack of
sufficient strength and dexterity. The Gamemaster might
also decide to double his chance of fumbling while
wielding them.
ENCHANTMENTS: A lawfully enchanted great sword (a
family heirloom) said to have been forged in ages past to
fight the armies of the bright empire; it always delivers 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 104 -
maximum damage on the rare occasion he can
successfully wield it, and never breaks
SKILLS: Art (Etiquette) 75%, Insight 05%, Listen 05%,
Oratory 63%, Rant and Ramble 101%, Ride 64%, Young
Kingdoms 49%, Million Spheres 07%
HIS NO-NONSENSE LORMYRIAN SQUIRE
A man of simple tastes and strong loyalties. Having
vowed to serve the Lormyrian until the knight’s dying
day (an event he has lately come to fear that may occur
sooner than anticipated). His master has always been
prone to racing off on half-baked quests but in recent
months his behaviour has become increasingly erratic.
Wherever the knight goes this good-natured but
grumbling mountain of a man will trail after him,
awkwardly, indeed comically perched upon his plodding
pony and doing his best to keep the knight out of
trouble. When not nervously cracking his knuckles or
chewing his beard, the squire enjoys ale, fishing, and
reminiscing about the farm on which he was raised.
CHAOS 6, BALANCE 19, LAW 28
STR 15, CON 13, SIZ 18, INT 13, POW 10, DEX 11,
APP 12
HIT POINTS: 16 ARMOUR: Leather & Rings
(Helm On) 1d6+1
DAMAGE BONUS: 1D6
Weapon Skill Damage
Lormyrian Axe 50% 3d6+db
Cavalry Lance 45% 1d8+1+db (+horse
db when charging)
SKILLS: Craft (Armourer) 23%, Craft (Horse-Breaking)
56%, Fast Talk 37%, Fret 75%, Insight 49%, Natural World
78%, Ride 65%, Throw 61%, Track 45%
SHARP-EYED ASTRONOMER
This adventuress, one of the elite
philosopher/astronomer/priests known as the
Scrutineers, is far from home. She hails from the
Unknown East, and the city of Her’is in Elwher. The stars
are her gods, and she believes that through careful study
of their movements she can predict future events. She
has made a special study of the constellation known to
her as Angharand the Charioteer, the goddess of
merchants and travellers, and has travelled to the
barbaric western lands in order to better view an
upcoming transit of the moon across the constellation in
question.
The scrutineer carries a leather satchel that contains her
journal, inkpots and quills, an astrolabe, and a brass
telescope. She is tall, slim and deeply tanned, with bright
green eyes and long red hair that falls unbound to her
waist. She dresses in rich fabrics of crimson and orange
linen and wool. She speaks only broken Common, in a
lilting brogue, but is fluent in the poetic Eastern language
known as ‘pande. A stranger in Old Hrolmar, she might
seek guides, directions, or simply company after her long
journey on foot from the Eastern Kingdoms.
CHAOS 12, BALANCE 45, LAW 18
STR 11, CON 12, SIZ 14, INT 18, POW 17, DEX 13,
APP 15
HIT POINTS: 13 ARMOUR: None
DAMAGE BONUS: None
Weapon Skill Damage
Quarterstaff 85% 1d8+db
SKILLS: Art (Astronomy) 87%, Art (Astrology) 72%,
Natural World 45%, Other Language (Common) 18%,
Own Language (‘Pande) 86%, Oratory 45%, Potions 45%,
Unknown Kingdoms 48%, Young Kingdoms 15%
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 105 -
T
STORY SEEDS
HIS CHAPTER PRESENTS FOUR scenario
outlines that can be developed into
complete adventures set in and around Old
Hrolmar. Some are suitable for a single evening’s
entertainment; others suggest possibilities for
much larger campaigns.
All these story seeds draw upon the history
of Old Hrolmar and the marvels and secrets,
described throughout this monograph.
Gamemasters are encouraged to use these story
seeds in conjunction with the statistics presented
in the
HROLMARLIAN
DIGEST to
create a
diverse and
interesting
campaign
setting, in
which the
adventures
can explore the ever-changing face of the Young
Kingdoms.
A complete introductory Stormbringer
campaign based in Old Hrolmar, and making
full use of the background material presented in
this monograph, is currently in development and
will be released by Chaosium in late 2006.
AWEEPING ROSE
BY RICHARD WATTS
Late one night, as they return to their lodgings,
the adventurers encounter a naked and
desperate young woman stumbling and sobbing
down the street towards them. Ranni-Parl-Kasan,
a nineteen-year-old Tarkeshite peasant, has just
escaped from a vile Foreign Quarter brothel,
where she has been held against her will, and is
now anxiously trying to avoid pursuit. When the
adventurers first meet her, Ranni is disoriented
and distraught. The Gamemaster must decide if
the brothel’s guards are pursuing her, and
whether they attack immediately or follow their
prize to learn more about her ‘saviours’, before
attempting her recapture at some later stage of
the scenario. The Criminals section of the
HROLMARLIAN DIGEST provides appropriate
statistics for
the brothel
guards.
Ranni’s
story is
typical of
many young
girls lured to
Old Hrolmar.
Having met a smooth-tongued Vilmirian in
Barnarva who promised her work as a servant in
a rich man’s house, and who advanced her the
money for her passage, Ranni embarked for the
city with high hopes for the future. Upon arrival
she was met at the docks by a Pan Tangian
guard, taken to New Hrolmar, and enslaved.
Half-starved and badly beaten, Ranni is unable
to trace her way back to the brothel she claims
to have escaped from, although if the
adventurers seek evidence that supports her
story, the welts and scratches that map a history
of abuse across her body indicate that Ranni’s
tale is true. It is likely that the adventurers will
try to help the girl to free her fellow sex-slaves.
To do so they must first find the brothel in
question: the Wreath of Roses in New Hrolmar
When that time came, there was a great movement
upon the Earth and above it; the destiny of Men and
Gods was hammered out upon the forge of Fate and
monstrous wars were brewed and mighty deeds
performed. And in this time, which was called the Age
of the Young Kingdoms, there rose up many heroes.
THE CHRONICLE OF THE BLACK SWORD 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 106 -
(see page 70). Asking questions around New
Hrolmar about missing girls will attract the
interest of Ulf Eel Urdon Mreowushar, a
suspicious warrior woman from the Weeping
Waste who is on a similar, more personal quest
(see page 70).
Its owner is a powerful and unscrupulous
noble, Lord Garçilaso Domingo of Hilltown
(page 47), whose identity is known only to
Dieguito Fornova, the brothel-keeper. What
follows once the adventurers meddle in Lord
Domingo’s affairs, only the Gamemaster and fate
can decide?
THE QUEEN OF THE CATS
BY RICHARD WATTS
Cheaply printed leaflets announcing the
imminent arrival of Nikos Akso’s Circus Bizarre
are distributed throughout the city. The flier’s
woodcuts depict some of the circus’s promised
delights, such as acrobats, clowns and wild
beasts, while the printed text alludes to other
marvels: Ilsylla, the famous flying dancer of
Myyrrhn, and a truly startling freakshow
displaying ‘the misfits and marvels of nature at its
most cruel, including the dreadful Narlargrun,
and the Talking Cat of Oberlorn.’
The Ilmioran circus sets up camp on the
west bank of the Hrol, just outside New
Hrolmar, late the following day. Nikos Akso, the
owner, has toured the Circus Bizarre throughout
Ilmiora and the Vilmirian Protectorates for
several years and now he aims to increase his
takings by risking a visit to Old Hrolmar,
currently the only Vilmirian city on his itinerary.
The corpulent Akso has only two loves: his
acrobatic equestrian wife Tertzia (who is
conducting a secret affair with Rangi Momori,
the show’s Pikaraydian strongman) and his
growing fortune. Other notable circus folk
include the Jkarkorian lion-tamer Colonel
Shalaan, who sports an impressively waxed
moustache, and is always immaculately dressed;
the aforementioned Myyrrhn woman Ilsylla, an
enigmatic, dark-eyed presence; and a Baloworshipping
quintet of clowns from Argimiliar
who are lead by Zoko of Adlermaigne, a tortured
artist prone to periods of terrible despondency.
No doubt the adventurers will be eager to
sample the entertainments the circus offers. If
they need encouragement, an employer might
ask them to escort his wife or children to a
performance; alternatively, perhaps an
adventurer wins free tickets to the
extravaganzain a game of dice.
The show is truly amazing, with
breathtaking acrobatics on horseback and the
trapeze; comedic clowning; performing lions;
and an aerial dance by the Myyrrhn woman
Ilsylla that is so sensual that women cover their
children’s eyes and men gape in wonder. Nikos
Akso, who doubles as the ringmaster, promises
at the end of her act that Ilyslla is also available
for private performances for discerning
gentlemen.
As well as the main performances in the big
top, there is also a sideshow: games of skill and
chance, exotic foods, and Dr Kraichin’s Carnival
Macabre. Here one can see the bearded woman,
the skeleton man, co-joined twins from barbaric
Oin, the fearful Mole Worm of the Weeping
Waste (a small specimen, stuffed and mounted),
the two-headed dog (also stuffed) and, wonder of
wonders, the famous Talking Cat of Oberlorn.
The latter is the size of a large house cat,
with mangy bluish fur and indigo eyes. A small
silver chain attached to a light leather collar
keeps it tethered to a post. Whenever its
Lormyrian owner, Dr Kraichen, pokes it with a
stick, the cat hisses, then opens its mouth and
clearly speaks in long, yowling, angry sentences,
although in a language than none have yet been
able to understand.
Successful Natural World rolls reveal subtle
differences in the cat’s physiology from any
known Young Kingdoms species: its neck is
longer, its front paws sport a semi-opposable
claw, and its eyes, although glazed, reveal a
curious intelligence. The same roll also suggests
that the cat is slowly starving to death, while a
Physik roll suggests likewise.
Although the circus folk know the cat as
Bluey, its real name is Princess Yaobaksa, the
exiled heir to the throne of Saluma, a nation of
intelligent cats on a distant plane. A year ago
Princess Yaobaksa was banished from her world
by the usurper Tahara, an evil sorcerer who
murdered her royal father and declared himself
Saluma’s king. Found wandering in the wilds of
Ilmiora near Oberlorn, the cat princess was sold 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 107 -
to the circus, where she has languished ever
since.
Unknown to all, Princess Yaobaksa has
picked up a smattering of broken Common over
the last year, although she will not speak it
except in extraordinary circumstances, possibly
to sympathetic adventurers and potential
rescuers.
Yaobaksa is desperate to return to her own
world, but after a year imprisoned in the
freakshow, has almost given up hope. As a result
of her deep depression she barely eats, and is in
increasingly poor shape.
Meanwhile, a rebellion has broken out in
Saluma, and even now an army of crack cat
troops prepares to embark on an epic voyage
across the Multiverse in order to rescue Princess
Yaobaksa, hoping that she will lead them to
victory against the usurper Tahara. They will
come armed with strange and deadly weapons,
although scouts will be sent through first, to
pinpoint the princess’ exact location, which they
have roughly divined through sorcery.
Simultaneously, the decadent Ilmiorian
noblewoman, Lady Nicolossa Faenzan of
Karlaak, has set upon the idea of adding the
talking cat to her own collection of freaks and
wonders. (Among her possessions are a talking
brass head that predicts the future; one of the
hungry paintings of the mad slave-artist Halig of
Lormyr; and a miniature city inhabited by tiny
people contained within in a fist-sized crystal
globe.) Lady Faenzan has already offered
increasingly large sums of money for the cat;
rebuffed, she will now send thugs to steal it,
assuming that they cannot threaten Dr Kraichen
to part with the cat first. The increasingly blatant
attempts at intimidation staged by Lady
Faenzan’s heavy-handed thugs, including
mysterious fires and the cutting of important
ropes and tethers, spread havoc and fear
throughout the circus.
Dr Kraichen is determined not to let
Princess Yaobaksa out of his clutches, as
customers return again and again to see her,
paying five groats per view, and he has dreams
of making his fortune by touring with the cat to
all the great cities of the Young Kingdoms. After
the first few ‘accidents’ staged by Lady Faenzan’s
hired thugs, Nikos Akso begins to press the
doctor to sell the cat to the Ilmioran, while
Akso’s wife, the duplicitous Tertzia, plots with
her strongman lover to steal Yaobaksa for
themselves and set up their own circus.
Into this web of schemes and conflict walk
the adventurers, innocent of everything but their
desire for entertainment, and likely to be seen by
Princess Yaobaksa as her potential saviours.
What dramas result from their involvement in
this story will depend of the roll of the dice, and
the Gamemaster’s devious mind. Rewards for
their involvement will include Balance
allegiance checks, and the possible favour of
Meerclaw, the Beast Lord of Cats, as well as
powerful feline allies on a distant plane.
TOWERING PRIDE
BY JOHN R. WHITE
Two large adjacent constructions begin to
overshadow their Hillside neighbours, and soon
come to dominate the city’s burgeoning new
skyline.
Two rival noble houses, headed
respectively by Lord Manyule Saggio and Lord
Hortun Mulay, have found a new means to
continue their ancient feud: by competing to see
who can build the tallest and most magnificent
tower in the city before All God's Day.
While listening to local speculation about
the towers, the adventurers learn that agents
representing the feuding nobles are recruiting
watchmen to guard their respective building
sites. Lucrative wages are offered for what seems
like simple work, and the Gamemaster should try
to ensure that the adventurers accept the
employment offer - if the adventurers have rivals
of their own, then those individuals have already
taken service with one or the other nobleman,
which may in turn spur the adventurers into
action.
Lord Mulay has secured the full
cooperation of Old Hrolmar’s best architects and
stonemasons. His grand design is inspired by the
famous Porcelain Tower of Kariss, and the
construction also includes marble cladding, and
niches that will feature statues of famous Mulay
ancestors.
Lord Saggio, meanwhile, has persuaded his
cousin, the legate of the 5th Legion, to let him
use the services of an army penal unit as his
labourers. This hard-working group of convicted 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 108 -
legionnaires - who are being punished for a
range of petty crimes, from drunkenness and
theft through to insubordination - are overseen
by Captain Heracio Bicenio, an ambitious
military engineer. Lord Saggio’s tower will be
decorated with bas-relief sculptures depicting
military triumphs and Law’s vanquishing of
Chaos. The most fearsome Chaos-beasts will
double as gargoyles whose mouths will gout
water when it rains.
On taking service with one of these two
nobles, the adventurers quickly discover that the
intensive rivalry between the two patrons has
permeated down to their workforces. Arguments
between their respective labourers are
increasingly common, and insults turn the air
blue.
Lord Mulay’s employees strive frantically to
outdo their opponents, driven by a combination
of pride, the prestige that the victors will win,
and increasingly generous wages.
Lord Saggio’s workers, being military
prisoners, are unpaid, but he has promised to
secure their release if they win the race to
complete their tower first, ensuring their eager
and disciplined compliance. The money he
saves on labour he instead pours into buying the
best-quality building materials, and hiring
stonemasons and sculptors from Jadmar and
Rignariom to work on his tower’s decorative
aspects.
As the frantic and reckless building of the
two follies continues, accidents begin to occur
on site, and brawls break out between the two
workforces.
Eventually, Administrator Gutierre
Ontanon, a surveyor-priest of Arkyn and Old
Hrolmar's chief architect, manages to intervene
between the feuding noblemen in the interests of
public safety. He enforces a maximum height of
150 feet on both towers. Unnoticed by Ontanon
however, Lord Saggio’s draughtsman has
managed to include a cunningly obscured
notation into the final plans that he submits.
These convert the standard Young Kingdom
measurements into the long defunct Shazaarian
cubit, ensuring that the Saggio tower will stand a
full twelve and a half feet taller than its rival
should.
As the festivals date draws near, Lords
Saggio and Mulay will be prepared to listen to
increasingly wild plans to spy upon, frustrate and
undermine (possibly literally) their rival. Captain
Bicenio, the military engineer, suggests invoking
earth elementals and bargaining with them to
weaken the Mulay tower’s foundations. The
foreman of the Mulay builders tries to initiate a
nighttime mission to release Lord Saggio’s
military prisoners from their captivity.
The adventurers may be drawn into these
schemes, and should also be encouraged to
suggest other wild or clever plans to help their
employer gain the upper hand in the
architectural battle. They will be rewarded with
a purse of coins for any idea that seems
especially inventive or successful.
Amidst the growing madness clearer heads
take counsel. The relatives of the two noblemen,
worried by their imminent mutual bankruptcy,
collude. The adventurers are approached to try
and resolve the situation peacefully, whilst
preserving the honour of both Houses.
Do the adventurers opt for acting in the
interests of harmony, or will they risk a sudden
and ruinous doom as predicted by a demented
priest? A lone fanatic, a skeletal and threadbare
priest of Saint Valario, daily rails against the
blasphemous pride of Lords Saggio and Mulay,
and fulminates against the two rising towers,
which overshadow his old temple. He says that
the gods will strike down the towers and their
masters as punishment. Could he be right?
REUNIONS IN THE DARK
BY NICK MIDDLETON
A naive young Pikaraydian called Ngaro
Hungura has recently arrived in Old Hrolmar
and seeks those familiar with the city in helping
him locate his missing mother. The adventurers
are recommended to him by one of their
previous employers, and so he seeks them out.
Hungura is a typical Pikaraydian youth,
dark-skinned and powerfully built. His face and
arms are heavily tattooed, and his armour is
painted with similar designs. He wears a
checked kilt and a sleeveless jerkin. An empty
scabbard is slung by his side, as his broadsword
is in the custody of the Grey Defenders).
His mother, Aku Hungura, has seemingly
vanished after embarking for Old Hrolmar one 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 109 -
year ago in search of her errant husband, his
father; the Vilmirian-born merchant Yann
Nairon. Ngaro has traced her this far, but faced
with the daunting size of the city, needs help
from those more familiar with Old Hrolmar to
help him track her down. The youth will pay
cash for the adventurers’ services, advancing
them five bronzes each, with another 45 bronzes
each to come at the end of the week, and every
week thereafter while they are in his employ. He
promises another 500 bronzes, to be shared
among the adventurers equally, when they find
his mother.
Hungura knows that Yann Nairon, his
father, was originally from Dolgar, capital of a
neighbouring duchy, but was apprenticed to a
Hrolmarlian merchant at 15. Ten years later, on
a trading mission to Pikarayd, Nairon fell in love
with Aku Hungura, and established a successful
business in Chalal with his new wife. Two years
ago Nairon returned to Vilmir, ostensibly to meet
with his old business partners, and has not been
heard from since. Ngaro’s mother Aku followed
after her husband a year later, and has also
disappeared.
Ngaro’s only lead is a story his father used
to tell about trading out of Old Hrolmar’s
Merchant’s Quarter. Persistent searching, or
questions (and perhaps a bribe) to a clerk at the
Merchant’s Association on Valario Street, will
help track down Yann Nairon’s old partners,
Franchist Malcon and Holon Bicenio. These two
men are evasive, and indicate only that Nairon
visited them two years ago, selling them his
share of the business before once more leaving
the city.
It will take considerable pressure or skill to
reveal that they are actually holding those funds
in trust, as Nairon went home to Dolgar after
meeting them, before the sale could be finalised,
and has not returned.
Particularly persuasive adventurers will
learn that they are not the first to ask after Yann
Nairon’s whereabouts: a month after his
departure, agents of Duke Octaviar of Dolgar
came to Malcon and Bicenio’s office asking
questions about the missing merchant and his
dealings. Then, about a year ago, a Pikaraydian
woman claiming to be the missing merchant’s
wife showed up asking the same questions. The
merchants explain that they sent her in the
direction of Dolgar, and have not heard from her
since.
Unknown to Malcon and Bicenio, Aku
Hungura has recently returned to Old Hrolmar.
In the year since she stepped off the ship from
Pikarayd, the Pikaraydian has seen and learnt
much that disgusts her about her husband’s
homeland. In Dolgar she learnt that Nairon’s
own family had accused him of sedition in his
absence, in order to curry favour with their liege,
the Duke of Dolgar. When Yann Nairon arrived
home two years ago, he was clapped in chains
instead of receiving the warm welcome he
expected. The merchant now languishes in
Dolgar’s salt mines, and is close to death.
Over the last months Aku has sought out all
she could discover about the mines. She learned
that they are of ancient Melnibonéan origin, and
also of the existence of a map of the mines,
currently in the possession of Old Hrolmar’s
scholarly Lord Jolben Nadal. The map is said to
show the layout of the oldest mines, including a
tunnel that connects them to the cellars of the
old Melnibonéan overseer’s villa, now a ruin.
Armed with this information, Aku Hungura
is cautiously courting the favour of Ramirez the
Pustulant, Old Hromar’s beggar-lord (see PLOTS
AND POWERS) in the hope that he can help her
steal the map. Her son’s arrival complicates
matters. It is not long before Ramirez’s beggars
report his arrival to their master, and a family
reunion is planned.
With her son and the adventurers on the
scene, Aku no longer needs the beggar-lord’s aid
in stealing the map, but Ramirez has plans of his
own. He demands that the map be stolen as
planned, and used to rescue Fausto the Foul (a
beggar prince who was sent to the mines two
months ago) at the same time as Yann Nairon.
Naturally Ramirez will hold Ngaro Hungura’s
mother Aku as a bargaining chip to ensure that
his will is done.
Thereafter the adventurers must execute a
burglary from Lord Jolben Nadal’s house to
retrieve the map, and then trek to the barren hills
of Dolgar, and the miserable town of Sheff (the
closest settlement to the mines) where a daring
rescue must be planned without alerting the
authorities.
Potential difficulties include the
legionnaires who guard the mine, and their 
A GUIDE TO OLD HROLMAR
- 110 -
savage mastiffs; finding two separate prisoners
within the arid tunnels of the salt mine while
hoping none of the other inmates raise the alarm;
a chance collapse of a weakened section of the
mine; and the restless spirits of the thousands of
prisoners who have died in this hell hole over
the centuries. Other potential complications
include finding the ruins of the old overseer’s
villa outside Sheff, and whatever was left behind,
when the Melnibonéans departed the place four
and a half centuries ago.
Once the rescue has been staged the
adventurers must return to Old Hrolmar in the
company of two wanted escapees (one close to
death, the other a wretched and annoying
beggar) along a highway patrolled by the king’s
soldiers. Back in Old Hrolmar, they must
somehow convince Ramirez the Pustulant to
keep his word and release Aku Hungura. Once
united, Ngaro Hungura and his parents depart
for Pikarayd post-haste, vowing never to return
to blighted, benighted Vilmir. 